Donna Tartt 


The Secret History 


First published in 1992 


Contents: 


Prologue 
Book I 
Chapter 1 
Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 
Chapter 4 
Chapter 5 
Book II 
Chapter 6 


Chapter 7 


Chapter 8 
Epilogue 
Acknowledgments 


About the Author 


The Secret History 


For Bret Easton Ellis, whose generosity will never cease to warm my heart; 
and for Paul Edward Mc Gloin, muse and Maecenas, who is the dearest friend 
I will ever have in this world. I enquire now as to the genesis of a philologist 
and assert the following: 


1. A young man cannot possibly know what Greeks and Romans are. 
2. He does not know whether he is suited for finding out about them. 


— FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, Unzeitgemdsse Betrachtungen 


Come then, and let us pass a leisure hour in storytelling, and our story shall 
be the education of our heroes. 


— PLATO, Republic, book II 


Prologue ^ 


The snow in the mountains was melting and Bunny had been dead for 
several weeks before we came to understand the gravity of our situation. He'd 
been dead for ten days before they found him, you know. It was one of the 
biggest manhunts in Vermont history — state troopers, the FBI, even an army 
helicopter; the college closed, the dye factory in Hampden shut down, people 
coming from New Hampshire, upstate New York, as far away as Boston. 


It is difficult to believe that Henry's modest plan could have worked so well 
despite these unforeseen events. We hadn't intended to hide the body where it 
couldn't be found. In fact, we hadn't hidden it at all but had simply left it 
where it fell in hopes that some luckless passer-by would stumble over it 
before anyone even noticed he was missing. This was a tale that told itself 
simply and well: the loose rocks, the body at the bottom of the ravine with a 
clean break in the neck, and the muddy skidmarks of dug-in heels pointing the 
way down; a hiking accident, no more, no less, and it might have been left at 
that, at quiet tears and a small funeral, had it not been for the snow that fell 
that night; it covered him without a trace, and ten days later, when the thaw 
finally came, the state troopers and the FBI and the searchers from the town 
all saw that they had been walking back and forth over his body until the 
snow above it was packed down like ice. 


It is difficult to believe that such an uproar took place over an act for which I 
was partially responsible, even more difficult to believe I could have walked 
through it — the cameras, the uniforms, the black crowds sprinkled over Mount 
Cataract like ants in a sugar bowl — without incurring a blink of suspicion. But 
walking through it all was one thing; walking away, unfortunately, has proved 
to be quite another, and though once I thought I had left that ravine forever on 
an April afternoon long ago, now I am not so sure. Now the searchers have 
departed, and life has grown quiet around me, I have come to realize that 
while for years I might have imagined myself to be somewhere else, in reality 
I have been there all the time: up at the top by the muddy wheel-ruts in the 
new grass, where the sky is dark over the shivering apple blossoms and the 
first chill of the snow that will fall that night is already in the air. 


What are you doing up here? said Bunny, surprised, when he found the four 
of us waiting for him. 


Why, looking for new ferns, said Henry. 


And after we stood whispering in the underbrush — one last look at the body 
and a last look round, no dropped keys, lost glasses, everybody got 


everything? — and then started single file through the woods, I took one glance 
back through the saplings that leapt to close the path behind me. Though I 
remember the walk back and the first lonely flakes of snow that came drifting 
through the pines, remember piling gratefully into the car and starting down 
the road like a family on vacation, with Henry driving clench-jawed through 
the potholes and the rest of us leaning over the seats and talking like children, 
though I remember only too well the long terrible night that lay ahead and the 
long terrible days and nights that followed, I have only to glance over my 
shoulder for all those years to drop away and I see it behind me again, the 
ravine, rising all green and black through the saplings, a picture that will 
never leave me. 


I suppose at one time in my life I might have had any number of stories, but 
now there is no other. This is the only story I will ever be able to tell. 


Book I ^ 


Chapter 1 ^ 


Does such a thing as 'the fatal flaw,' that showy dark crack running down the 
middle of a life, exist outside literature? I used to think it didn't. Now I think it 
does. And I think that mine is this: a morbid longing for the picturesque at all 
costs. 


A moi. L'histoire d'une de mes folies. 


My name is Richard Papen. I am twenty-eight years old and I had never seen 
New England or Hampden College until I was nineteen. I am a Californian by 
birth and also, I have recently discovered, by nature. The last is something I 
admit only now, after the fact. Not that it matters. 


I grew up in Piano, a small silicon village in the north. No sisters, no 
brothers. My father ran a gas station and my mother stayed at home until I got 
older and times got tighter and she went to work, answering phones in the 
office of one of the big chip factories outside San Jose. 


Piano. The word conjures up drive-ins, tract homes, waves of heat rising 
from the blacktop. My years there created for me an expendable past, 
disposable as a plastic cup. Which I suppose was a very great gift, in a way. 
On leaving home I was able to fabricate a new and far more satisfying history, 
full of striking, simplistic environmental influences; a colorful past, easily 
accessible to strangers. 


The dazzle of this fictive childhood — full of swimming pools and orange 
groves and dissolute, charming show-biz parents has all but eclipsed the drab 
original. In fact, when I think about my real childhood I am unable to recall 
much about it at all except a sad jumble of objects: the sneakers 1 wore year- 
round; coloring books and comics from the supermarket; little of interest, less 
of beauty. I was quiet, tall for my age, prone to freckles. I didn't have many 
friends but whether this was due to choice or circumstance I do not now know 
.1 did well in school, it seems, but not exceptionally well; I liked to read — 
Tom Swift, the Tolkien books — but also to watch television, which I did 
plenty of, lying on the carpet of our empty living room in the long dull 
afternoons after school. 


I honestly can't remember much else about those years except a certain mood 
that permeated most of them, a melancholy feeling that I associate with 
watching "The Wonderful World of Disney’ on Sunday nights. Sunday was a 
sad day — early to bed, school the next morning, I was constantly worried my 
homework was wrong — but as I watched the fireworks go off in the night sky, 


over the floodlit castles of Disneyland, I was consumed by a more general 
sense of dread, of imprisonment within the dreary round of school and home: 
circumstances which, to me at least, presented sound empirical argument for 
gloom. My father was mean, and our house ugly, and my mother didn't pay 
much attention to me; my clothes were cheap and my haircut too short and no 
one at school seemed to like me that much; and since all this had been true for 
as long as I could remember, I felt things would doubtless continue in this 
depressing vein as far as I could foresee. In short: I felt my existence was 
tainted, in some subtle but essential way. 


I suppose it's not odd, then, that I have trouble reconciling my life to those of 
my friends, or at least to their lives as I perceive them to be. Charles and 
Camilla are orphans (how I longed to be an orphan when I was a child!) 
reared by grandmothers and great-aunts in a house in Virginia: a childhood I 
like to think about, with horses and rivers and sweet-gum trees. And Francis. 


His mother, when she had him, was only seventeen — a thinblooded, 
capricious girl with red hair and a rich daddy, who ran off with the drummer 
for Vance Vane and his Musical Swains. 


She was home in three weeks, and the marriage was annulled in six; and, as 
Francis is fond of saying, the grandparents brought them up like brother and 
sister, him and his mother, brought them up in such a magnanimous style that 
even the gossips were impressed — English nannies and private schools, 
summers in Switzerland, winters in France. Consider even bluff old Bunny, if 
you would. Not a childhood of reefer coats and dancing lessons, any more 
than mine was. But an American childhood. Son of a Clemson football star 
turned banker. Four brothers, no sisters, in a big noisy house in the suburbs, 
with sailboats and tennis rackets and golden retrievers; summers on Cape 
Cod, boarding schools near Boston and tailgate picnics during football season; 
an upbringing vitally present in Bunny in every respect, from the way he 
shook your hand to the way he told a joke. 


I do not now nor did 1 ever have anything in common with any of them, 
nothing except a knowledge of Greek and the year of my life I spent in their 
company. And if love is a thing held in common, I suppose we had that in 
common, too, though I realize that might sound odd in light of the story I am 
about to tell. 


How to begin. 


After high school I went to a small college in my home town (my parents 
were opposed, as it had been made very plain that I was expected to help my 
father run his business, one of the many reasons I was in such an agony to 
escape) and, during my two years there, I studied ancient Greek. This was due 


to no love for the language but because I was majoring in pre-med (money, 
you see, was the only way to improve my fortunes, doctors make a lot of 
money, quod erat demonstrandum) and my counselor had suggested I take a 
language to fulfill the humanities requirement; and, since the Greek classes 
happened to meet in the afternoon, I took Greek so I could sleep late on 
Mondays. It was an entirely random decision which, as you will see, turned 
out to be quite fateful. 


I did well at Greek, excelled in it, and I even won an award from the Classics 
department my last year. It was my favorite class because it was the only one 
held in a regular classroom no jars of cow hearts, no smell of formaldehyde, 
no cages full of screaming monkeys. Initially I had thought with hard work I 
could overcome a fundamental squeamishness and distaste for my subject, 
that perhaps with even harder work I could simulate something like a talent 
for it. But this was not the case. As the months went by I remained 
uninterested, if not downright sickened, by my study of biology; my grades 
were poor; I was held in contempt by teacher and classmate alike. In what 
seemed even to me a doomed and Pyrrhic gesture, I switched to English 
literature without telling my parents. I felt that I was cutting my own throat by 
this, that I would certainly be very sorry, being still convinced that it was 
better to fail in a lucrative field than to thrive in one that my father (who knew 
nothing of either finance or academia) had assured me was most unprofitable; 
one which would inevitably result in my hanging around the house for the rest 
of my life asking him for money; money which, he assured me forcefully, he 
had no intention of giving me. 


So I studied literature and liked it better. But I didn't like home any better. I 
don't think I can explain the despair my surroundings inspired in me. Though 
I now suspect, given the circumstances and my disposition, I would've been 
unhappy anywhere, in Biarritz or Caracas or the Isle of Capri, I was then 
convinced that my unhappiness was indigenous to that place. Perhaps a part of 
it was. While to a certain extent Milton is right — the mind is its own place and 
in itself can make a Heaven of Hell and so forth — it is nonetheless clear that 
Piano was modeled less on Paradise than that other, more dolorous city. In 
high school I developed a habit of wandering through shopping malls after 
school, swaying through the bright, chill mezzanines until I was so dazed with 
consumer goods and product codes, with promenades and escalators, with 
mirrors and Muzak and noise and light, that a fuse would blow in my brain 
and all at once everything would become unintelligible: color without form, a 
babble of detached molecules. Then I would walk like a zombie to the parking 
lot and drive to the baseball field, where I wouldn't even get out of the car, just 
sit with my hands on the steering wheel and stare at the Cyclone fence and the 
yellowed winter grass until the sun went down and it was too dark for me to 
see. 


Though I had a confused idea that my dissatisfaction was bohemian, vaguely 
Marxist in origin (when I was a teenager I made a fatuous show of socialism, 
mainly to irritate my father), I couldn't really begin to understand it; and I 
would have been angry if someone had suggested that it was due to a strong 
Puritan streak in my nature, which was in fact the case. Not long ago I found 
this passage in an old notebook, written when I was eighteen or so: "There is 
to me about this place a smell of rot, the smell of rot that ripe fruit makes. 
Nowhere, ever, have the hideous mechanics of birth and copulation and death 
— those monstrous upheavals of life that the Greeks call miasma, defilement — 
been so brutal or been painted up to look so pretty; have so many people put 
so much faith in lies and mutability and death death death.' 


This, I think, is pretty rough stuff. From the sound of it, had I stayed in 
California I might have ended up in a cult or at the very least practicing some 
weird dietary restriction. I remember reading about Pythagoras around this 
time, and finding some of his ideas curiously appealing — wearing white 
garments, for instance, or abstaining from foods which have a soul. 


But instead I wound up on the East Coast. 


I lit on Hampden by a trick of fate. One night, during a long Thanksgiving 
holiday of rainy weather, canned cranberries, ball games droning from the 
television, I went to my room after a fight with my parents (I cannot 
remember this particular fight, only that we always fought, about money and 
school) and was tearing through my closet trying to find my coat when out it 
flew: a brochure from Hampden College, Hampden, Vermont. 


It was two years old, this brochure. In high school a lot of colleges had sent 
me things because I did well on my SATs, though unfortunately not well 
enough to warrant much in the way of scholarships, and this one | had kept in 
my Geometry book throughout my senior year. 


I don't know why it was in my closet. I suppose I'd saved it because it was so 
pretty. Senior year, I had spent dozens of hours studying the photographs as 
though if I stared at them long enough and longingly enough I would, by 
some sort of osmosis, be transported into their clear, pure silence. Even now I 
remember those pictures, like pictures in a storybook one loved as a child. 
Radiant meadows, mountains vaporous in the trembling distance; leaves 
ankle-deep on a gusty autumn road; bonfires and fog in the valleys; cellos, 
dark windowpanes, snow. 


Hampden College, Hampden, Vermont. Established 1895. 


(This alone was a fact to cause wonder; nothing 1 knew of in Piano had been 
established much before 1962.) Student body, five hundred. Coed. 


Progressive. Specializing in the liberal arts. 


Highly selective. 'Hampden, in providing a well-rounded course of study in 
the Humanities, seeks not only to give students a rigorous background in the 
chosen field but insight into all the disciplines of Western art, civilization, and 
thought. In doing so, we hope to provide the individual not only with facts, 
but with the raw materials of wisdom.’ 


Hampden College, Hampden, Vermont. Even the name had an austere 
Anglican cadence, to my ear at least, which yearned hopelessly for England 
and was dead to the sweet dark rhythms of the little mission towns. For a long 
time I looked at a picture of the building they called Commons. It was 
suffused with a weak, academic light — different from Piano, different from 
anything I had ever known — a light that made me think of long hours in dusty 
libraries, and old books, and silence. 


My mother knocked on the door, said my name. I didn't answer. I tore out 
the information form in the back of the brochure and started to fill it in. Name: 
John Richard Papen. 


Address: 4487 Mimosa Court; Piano, California. Would you like to receive 
information on Financial Aid? Yes. And I mailed it the following morning. 


The months subsequent were an endless dreary battle of paperwork, full of 
stalemates, fought in trenches. My father refused to complete the financial aid 
papers; finally, in desperation, I stole the tax returns from the glove 
compartment of his Toyota and did them myself. More waiting. Then a note 
from the Dean of Admissions. An interview was required, and when could I 
fly to Vermont? I could not afford to fly to Vermont, and I wrote and told him 
so. Another wait, another letter. The college would reimburse me for my 
travel expenses if their scholarship offer was accepted. Meanwhile the 
financial aid packet had come in. My family's contribution was more than my 
father said he could afford and he would not pay it. This sort of guerrilla 
warfare dragged on for eight months. Even today I do not fully understand the 
chain of events that brought me to Hampden. 


Sympathetic professors wrote letters; exceptions of various sorts were made 
in my case. And less than a year after I'd sat down on the gold shag carpet of 
my little room in Piano and impulsively filled out the questionnaire, I was 
getting off the bus in Hampden with two suitcases and fifty dollars in my 
pocket. 


I had never been east of Santa Fe, never north of Portland, and — when I 
stepped off the bus after a long anxious night that had begun somewhere in 
Illinois — it was six o'clock in the morning, and the sun was rising over 


mountains, and birches, and impossibly green meadows; and to me, dazed 
with night and no sleep and three days on the highway, it was like a country 
from a dream. 


The dormitories weren't even dorms — or at any rate not like the dorms I 
knew, with cinderblock walls and depressing, yellowish light — but white 
clapboard houses with green shutters, set back from the Commons in groves 
of maple and ash. All the same it never occurred to me that my particular 
room, wherever ii «t might be, would be anything but ugly and disappointing 
and it was with something of a shock that I saw it for the first time — a white 
room with big north-facing windows, monkish and bare, with scarred oak 
floors and a ceiling slanted like a garret's. On my first night there, I sat on the 
bed during the twilight while the walls went slowly from gray to gold to 
black, listening to a soprano's voice climb dizzily up and down somewhere at 
the other end of the hall until at last the light was completely gone, and the 
faraway soprano spiraled on and on in the darkness like some angel of death, 
and I can't remember the air ever seeming as high and cold and rarefied as it 
was that night, or ever feeling farther away from the low-slung lines of dusty 
Piano. 


Those first days before classes started I spent alone in my whitewashed 
room, in the bright meadows of Hampden. And I was happy in those first days 
as really I'd never been before, roaming like a sleepwalker, stunned and drunk 
with beauty. A group of red-cheeked girls playing soccer, ponytails flying, 
their shouts and laughter carrying faintly over the velvety, twilit field. 


Trees creaking with apples, fallen apples red on the grass beneath, the heavy 
sweet smell of apples rotting on the ground and the steady thrumming of 
wasps around them. Commons clock tower: ivied brick, white spire, 
spellbound in the hazy distance. 


The shock of first seeing a birch tree at night, rising up in the dark as cool 
and slim as a ghost. And the nights, bigger than imagining: black and gusty 
and enormous, disordered and wild with stars. 


I was planning to sign up for Greek again, as it was the only language at 
which I was at all proficient. But when I told this to the academic counselor to 
whom I had been assigned — a French teacher named Georges Laforgue, with 
olive skin and a pinched, long-nostriled nose like a turtle's — he only smiled, 
and pressed the tips of his fingers together. 'I am afraid there may be a 
problem,’ he said, in accented English. 


‘Why?’ 


'There is only one teacher of ancient Greek here and he is very particular 


about his students,’ 'I've studied Greek for two years.’ 


That probably will not make any difference. Besides, if you are going to 
major in English literature you will need a modern language. There is still 
space left in my Elementary French class and some room in German and 
Italian. The Spanish’ — he consulted his list — 'the Spanish classes are for the 
most part filled but if you like I will have a word with Mr Delgado.’ 


"Maybe you could speak to the Greek teacher instead.’ 


'I don't know if it would do any good. He accepts only a limited number of 
students. A very limited number. Besides, in my opinion, he conducts the 
selection on a personal rather than academic basis.’ 


His voice bore a hint of sarcasm; also a suggestion that, if it was all the same 
to me, he would prefer not to continue this particular conversation. 


'I don't know what you mean,’ I said. 


Actually, I thought I did know. Laforgue's answer surprised me. ‘It's nothing 
like that,’ he said. 'Of course he is a distinguished scholar. He happens to be 
quite charming as well. But he has what I think are some very odd ideas about 
teaching. He and his students have virtually no contact with the rest of the 
division. I don't know why they continue to list his courses in the general 
catalogue — it's misleading, every year there is confusion about it — because, 
practically speaking, the classes are closed. I am told that to study with him 
one must have read the right things, hold similar views. It has happened 
repeatedly that he has turned away students such as yourself who have done 
prior work in classics. 


With me' — he lifted an eyebrow — 'if the student wants to learn what I teach 
and is qualified, I allow him in my classes. Very democratic, no? It is the best 


way. 
‘Does that sort of thing happen often here?’ 


‘Of course. There are difficult teachers at every school. And plenty’ — to my 
surprise, he lowered his voice — 'and plenty here who are far more difficult 
than him. Though 1 must ask that you do not quote me on that.’ 


T won't,’ I said, a bit startled by this sudden confidential manner. 


‘Really, it is quite essential that you don't.’ He was leaning forward, 
whispering, his tiny mouth scarcely moving as he spoke. 


‘I must insist. Perhaps you are not aware of this but I have several formidable 


enemies in the Literature Division. Even, though you may scarcely believe it, 
here in my own department. Besides,’ he continued in a more normal tone, ‘he 
is a special case. He has taught here for many years and even refuses payment 
for his work." 


‘Why?’ 


'He is a wealthy man. He donates his salary to the college, though he accepts, 
I think, one dollar a year for tax purposes.’ 


'Oh,' I said. Even though I had been at Hampden only a few days, I was 
already accustomed to the official accounts of financial hardship, of limited 
endowment, of corners cut. 


‘Now me,’ said Lafbrgue, 'I like to teach well enough, but I have a wife and a 
daughter in school in France — the money comes in handy, yes?’ 


"Maybe I'll talk to him anyway.’ 


Laforgue shrugged. 'You can try. But I advise you not to make an 
appointment, or probably he will not see you. His name is Julian Morrow.’ 


I had not been particularly bent on taking Greek, but what Laforgue said 
intrigued me. I went downstairs and walked into the first office I saw. A thin, 
sour-looking woman with tired blond hair was sitting at the desk in the front 
room, eating a sandwich. 


‘It's my lunch hour,’ she said. 'Come back at two.' 

Tm sorry. I'm just looking for a teacher's office.’ 

"Well, I'm the registrar, not the switchboard. But I might know. Who is it?’ 
‘Julian Morrow. ' 


‘Oh. him,' she said, surprised. "What do you want with him? He's upstairs, I 
think, in the Lyceum.’ 


"What room?’ 
‘Only teacher up there. Likes his peace and quiet. You'll find him." 


Actually, finding the Lyceum wasn't easy at all. It was a small building on 
the edge of campus, old and covered with ivy in such a manner as to be 
almost indistinguishable from its landscape. 


Downstairs were lecture halls and classrooms, all of them empty, with clean 


blackboards and freshly waxed floors. I wandered around helplessly until 
finally I noticed the staircase — small and badly lit — in the far corner of the 
building. 


Once at the top I found myself in a long, deserted hallway. 


Enjoying the noise of my shoes on the linoleum, I walked along briskly, 
looking at the closed doors for numbers or names until I came to one that had 
a brass card holder and, within it, an engraved card that read julian morrow. I 
stood there for a moment and then I knocked, three short raps. 


A minute or so passed, and another, and then the white door opened just a 
crack. A face looked out at me. It was a small, wise face, as alert and poised 
as a question; and though certain features of it were suggestive of youth — the 
elfin upsweep of the eyebrows, the deft lines of nose and jaw and mouth — it 
was by no means a young face, and the hair was snow white. 


I stood there for a moment as he blinked at me. 


"How may I help you?' The voice was reasonable and kind, in the way that 
pleasant adults sometimes have with children. 


'I — well, my name is Richard Papen ' 


He put his head to the side and blinked again, bright-eyed, amiable as a 
sparrow. 


‘— and I want to take your class in ancient Greek.’ 


His face fell. ‘Oh. I'm sorry.' His tone of voice, incredibly enough, seemed to 
suggest that he really was sorry, sorrier than I was. 'I can't think of anything 
I'd like better, but I'm afraid there isn't any room. My class is already filled.’ 


Something about this apparently sincere regret gave me courage. 
‘Surely there must be some way,'I said. 'One extra student ' 


Tm terribly sorry, Mr Papen,' he said, almost as if he were consoling me on 
the death of a beloved friend, tiring to make me understand that he was 
powerless to help me in any substantial way. 'But I have limited myself to five 
students and I cannot even think of adding another.’ 


‘Five students is not very many.’ 


He shook his head quickly, eyes shut, as if entreaty were more than he could 
bear. 


‘Really, I'd love to have you, but I mustn't even consider it,’ he said. 'I'm 
terribly sorry. Will you excuse me now? I have a student with me.' 


More than a week went by. I started my classes and got a job with a 
professor of psychology named Dr Roland. (I was to assist him in some vague 
‘research,’ the nature of which I never discovered; he was an old, dazed, 
disordered-lookiiig fellow, a behavioralist, who spent most of his time 
loitering in the teachers’ lounge.) And I made some friends, most of them 
freshmen who lived in my house. Friends is perhaps an inaccurate word to 
use. 


We ate our meals together, saw each other coming and going, but mainly 
were thrown together by the fact that none of us knew anybody — a situation 
which, at the time, did not seem necessarily unpleasant. Among the few 
people I had, net who'd been at Hampden awhile, I asked what the story was 
with Julian Morrow. 


Nearly everyone had heard of him, and I was givm all sorts of contradictory 
but fascinating information: that he ivas a brilliant man; that he was a fraud; 
that he had no college degree; that he had been a great intellectual in the 
forties, and i friend to Ezra Pound and The. S. Eliot; that his family money 
iiad come from a partnership in a white-shoe banking firm or, conversely, 
from the purchase of foreclosed property during the Depression; that he had 
dodged the draft in some war (though chronologically this was difficult to 
compute); that he had ties with the Vatican; a deposed royal family in the 
Middle East; Franco's Spain. The degree of truth in any of this was, of course, 
unknowable but the more I heard about him, the more interested I became, 
and I began to watch for him and his little group of pupils around campus. 
Four boys and a girl, they were nothing so unusual at a distance. At close 
range, though, they were an arresting party at least to me, who had never seen 
anything like them, and to whom they suggested a variety of picturesque and 
fictive qualities. 


Two of the boys wore glasses, curiously enough the same kind: tiny, old- 
fashioned, with round steel rims. The larger of the two — and he was quite 
large, well over six feet — was dark-haired, with a square jaw and coarse, pale 
skin. He might have been handsome had his features been less set, or his eyes, 
behind the glasses, less expressionless and blank. He wore dark English suits 
and carried an umbrella (a bizarre sight in Hampden) and he walked stiffly 
through the throngs of hippies and beatniks and preppies and punks with the 
self-conscious formality of an old ballerina, surprising in one so large as he. 
‘Henry Winter,’ said my friends when I pointed him out, at a distance, making 
a wide circle to avoid a group of bongo players on the lawn. 


The smaller of the two — but not by much — was a sloppy blond boy, rosy- 


cheeked and gum-chewing, with a relentlessly cheery demeanor and his fists 
thrust deep in the pockets of his knee-sprung trousers. He wore the same 
jacket every day, a shapeless brown tweed that was frayed at the elbows and 
short in the sleeves, and his sandy hair was parted on the left, so a long 
forelock fell over one bespectacled eye. Bunny Corcoran was his name, 
Bunny being somehow short for Edmund. His voice was loud and honking, 
and carried in the dining halls. 


The third boy was the most exotic of the set. Angular and elegant, he was 
precariously thin, with nervous hands and a shrewd albino face and a short, 
fiery mop of the reddest hair I had ever seen. I thought (erroneously) that he 
dressed like Alfred Douglas, or the Comte de Montesquiou: beautiful starchy 
shirts with French cuffs; magnificent neckties; a black greatcoat that billowed 
behind him as he walked and made him look like a cross between a student 
prince andjack the Ripper. Once, to my delight, I even saw him wearing 
pince-nez. (Later, I discovered that they weren't real pince-nez, but only had 
glass in them, and that his eyes were a good deal sharper than my own.) 
Francis Abernathy was his name. Further inquiries elicited suspicion from 
male acquaintances, who wondered at my interest in such a person. 


And then there were a pair, boy and girl. I saw them together a great deal, 
and at first I thought they were boyfriend and girlfriend, until one day I saw 
them up close and realized they had to be siblings. Later I learned they were 
twins. They looked very much alike, with heavy dark-blond hair and epicene 
faces as clear, as cheerful and grave, as a couple of Flemish angels. 


And perhaps most unusual in the context of Hampden — where pseudo- 
intellects and teenage decadents abounded, and where black clothing was de 
rigueur — they liked to wear pale clothes, particularly white. In this swarm of 
cigarettes and dark sophistication they appeared here and there like figures 
from an allegory, or long-dead celebrants from some forgotten garden party. It 
was easy to find out who they were, as they shared the distinction of being the 
only twins on campus. Their names were Charles and Camilla Macaulay. 


All of them, to me, seemed highly unapproachable. But I watched them with 
interest whenever I happened to see them: Francis, stooping to talk to a cat on 
a doorstep; Henry dashing past at the wheel of a little white car, with Julian in 
the passenger's seat; Bunny leaning out of an upstairs window to yell 
something at the twins on the lawn below. Slowly, more information came niy 
way. Francis Abernathy was from Boston and, from most accounts, quite 
wealthy. Henry, too, was said to be wealthy; what's more, he was a linguistic 
genius. He spoke a number of languages, ancient and modern, and had 
published a translation of Anacreon, with commentary, when he was only 
eighteen. (I found this out from Georges Laforgue, who was otherwise sour 
and reticent on the topic; later I discovered that Henry, during his freshman 


year, had embarrassed Laforgue badly in front of the entire literature faculty 
during the question-and-answer period of his annual lecture on Racine.) The 
twins had an apartment off campus, and were from somewhere down south. 
And Bunny Corcoran had a habit of playing John Philip Sousa march tunes in 
his room, at full volume, late at night. 


Not to imply that 1 was overly preoccupied with any of this. I was settling in 
at school by this time; classes had begun and I was busy with my work. My 
interest in Julian Morrow and his Greek pupils, though still keen, was starting 
to wane when a curious coincidence happened. 


It happened the Wednesday morning of my second week, when I was in the 
library making some Xeroxes for Dr Roland before my eleven o'clock class. 
After about thirty minutes, spots of light swimming in front of my eyes, I 
went back to the front desk to give the Xerox key to the librarian and as I 
turned to leave I saw them, Bunny and the twins, sitting at a table that was 
spread with papers and pens and bottles of ink. The bottles of ink I remember 
particularly, because I was very charmed by them, and by the long black 
straight pens, which looked incredibly archaic and troublesome. Charles was 
wearing a white tennis sweater, and Camilla a sun dress with a sailor collar, 
and a straw hat. Bunny's tweed jacket was slung across the back of his chair, 
exposing several large rips and stains in the lining. He was leaning his elbows 
on the table, hair in eyes, his rumpled shirtsleeves held up with striped garters. 
Their heads were close together and they were talking quietly. 


I suddenly wanted to know what they were saying. I went to the bookshelf 
behind their table — the long way, as if I wasn't sure what 1 was looking for — 
all the way down until I was so close I could've reached out and touched 
Bunny's arm. My back to them, I picked a book at random — a ridiculous 
sociological text, as it happened — and pretended to study the index. 
Secondary Analysis. Secondary Deviance. Secondary Groups. Secondary 
Schools. 


'I don't know about that,’ Camilla was saying. 'If the Greeksi are sailing to 
Carthage, it should be accusative. Remember? Place J whither? That's the 
rule.’ 


‘Can't be.’ This was Bunny. His voice was nasal, garrulous,, W. C. Fields 
with a bad case of Long Island lockjaw. 'It's not’ place whither, it's place to. I 
put my money on the ablative case.' 


There was a confused rattling of papers. 


‘Wait,’ said Charles. His voice was a lot like his sister's **| hoarse, slightly 
southern. 'Look at this. They're not just sailing! to Carthage, they're sailing to 


attack it.’ 
"You're crazy.’ 
"No, they are. Look at the next sentence. We need a dative.’ 
‘Are you sure?’ 
More rustling of papers. 
‘Absolutely. Epi to karchidona.' 


'I don't see how,’ said Bunny. He sounded like Thurstc Ho well on ‘Gilligan's 
Island. 


'Ablative's the ticket. The hard on are always ablative. 


A slight pause. ‘Bunny,’ said Charles, ‘you're mixed up. Tb S ablative is in 
Latin.’ 


"Well, of course, I know that, said Bunny irritably, after confused pause 
which seemed to indicate the contrary, 'but ye know what I mean. Aorist, 
ablative, all the same thing, really..1 "Look, Charles,’ said Camilla. "This 
dative won't work.’ 


"Yes it will. They're sailing to attack, aren't they?’ 
"Yes, but the Greeks sailed over the sea to Carthage.' 
"But 1 put that epi in front of it.’ 


"Well, we can attack and still use epi, but we have to use an accusative 
because of the first rules.’ 


Segregation. Self. Self-concept. I looked down at the index and racked my 
brains for the case they were looking for. The Greeks sailed over the sea to 
Carthage. To Carthage. Place whither, place whence. Carthage. 


Suddenly something occurred to me. I closed the book and put it on the shelf 
and turned around. 'Excuse me?’ I said. 


Immediately they stopped talking, startled, and turned to stare at me. 
Tm sorry, but would the locative case do?’ 


Nobody said anything for a long moment. 


'Locative?' said Charles. 


‘Just add zde to karchido,' I said. 'I think it's zde. If you use that, you won't 
need a preposition, except the epi if they're going to war. It implies 
«Carthage-ward,» so you won't have to worry about a case, either.’ 


Charles looked at his paper, then at me. 'Locative?' he said. 

"That's pretty obscure.’ 

‘Are you sure it exists for Carthage?’ said Camilla. 

I hadn't thought of this. 'Maybe not,’ I said. 'I know it does for Athens." 


Charles reached over and hauled the lexicon towards him over the table and 
began to leaf through it. 


‘Oh, hell, don't bother, said Bunny stridently. 'If you don't have to decline it 
and it doesn't need a preposition it sounds good to me.’ He reared back in his 
chair and looked up at me. Td like to shake your hand, stranger.’ I offered it to 
him; he clasped and shook it firmly, almost knocking an ink bottle over with 
his elbow as he did so. 'Glad to meet you, yes, yes,’ he said, reaching up with 
the other hand to brush the hair from his eyes. 


I was confused by this sudden glare of attention; it was as if the characters in 
a favorite painting, absorbed in their own concerns, had looked up out of the 
canvas and spoken to me. 


Only the day before Francis, in a swish of black cashmere and cigarette 
smoke, had brushed past me in a corridor. For a moment, as his arm touched 
mine, he was a creature of flesh and blood, but the next he was a hallucination 
again, a figment of the imagination stalking down the hallway as heedless of 
me as ghosts, in their shadowy rounds, are said to be heedless of the living. 


Charles, still fumbling with the lexicon, rose and offered his hand. 'My name 
is Charles Macaulay. 


‘Richard Papen.’ 

‘Oh, you're the one,' said Camilla suddenly. 
"What?' 

"You. You came by to ask about the Greek class.’ 


‘This is my sister,’ said Charles, 'and this is — Bun, did you tell him your 
name already?’ 


"No, no, don't think so. You've made me a happy man, sir. 

We had ten more like this to do and five minutes to do them in. 
Edmund Corcoran's the name,’ said Bunny, grasping my hand again. 
"How long have you studied Greek?’ said Camilla. 


"Two years,’ 'You're rather good at it,’ 'Pity you aren't in our class,’ said 
Bunny. 


A strained silence. 


"Well,' said Charles uncomfortably, ‘Julian is funny about things like that,’ 
'Go see him again, why don't you,’ Bunny said. 'Take him some flowers and 
tell him you love Plato and he'll be eating out of your hand,’ Another silence, 
this one more disagreeable than the first. 


Camilla smiled, not exactly at me — a sweet, unfocused smile, quite 
impersonal, as if I were a waiter or a clerk in a store. Beside her Charles, who 
was still standing, smiled too and raised a polite eyebrow — a gesture which 
might have been nervous, might have meant anything, really, but which I took 
to mean Is that all? 


I mumbled something and was about to turn away when Bunny — who was 
staring in the opposite direction — shot out an arm and grabbed me by the 
wrist. 'Wait,' he said. 


Startled, I looked up. Henry had just come in the door — dark suit, umbrella, 
and all. 


When he got to the table he pretended not to see me. 'Hello,' he said to them. 
‘Are you finished?’ 


Bunny tossed his head at me. 'Look here, Henry, we've got someone to meet 
you,’ he said. 


Henry glanced up. His expression did not change. He shut his eyes and then 
reopened them, as if he found it extraordinary that someone such as myself 
should stand in his path of vision. 


"Yes, yes,’ said Bunny. "This man's name is Richard — Richard what?’ 
‘Papen.’ 


"Yes, yes. Richard Papen. Studies Greek.’ 


Henry brought his head up to look at me. 'Not here, surely,’ he said. 


'No,' I said, meeting his gaze, but his stare was so rude I was forced to cut 
my eyes away. 


‘Oh, Henry, look at this, would you,’ said Charles hastily, rustling through 
the papers again. 'We were going to use a dative or an accusative here but he 
suggested locative?' 


Henry leaned over his shoulder and inspected the page. 'Hmm, archaic 
locative,' he said. 'Very Homeric. Of course, it would be grammatically 
correct but perhaps a bit off contextually.' He brought his head back up to 
scrutinize me. The light was at an angle that glinted off his tiny spectacles, 
and I couldn't see his eyes behind them. 'Very interesting. You're a Homeric 
scholar?’ 


I might have said yes, but I had the feeling he would be glad to catch me in a 
mistake, and that he would be able to do it easily. 'I like Homer,' I said 
weakly. 


He regarded me with chill distaste. 'I love Homer,’ he said. 


‘Of course we're studying things rather more modern, Plato and the 
tragedians and so forth.’ 


I was trying to think of some response when he looked away in disinterest. 
"We should go,’ he said. 


Charles shuffled his papers together, stood up again; Camilla stood beside 
him and this time she offered me her hand, too. 


Side by side, they were very much alike, in similarity less of lineament than 
of manner and bearing, a correspondence of gesture which bounced and 
echoed between them so that a blink seemed to reverberate, moments later, in 
a twitch of the other's eyelid. Their eyes were the same color of gray, 
intelligent and calm. She, I thought, was very beautiful, in an unsettling, 
almost medieval way which would not be apparent to the casual observer. 


Bunny pushed his chair back and slapped me between the shoulder blades. 
"Well, sir,’ he said, 'we must get together sometime and talk about Greek, yes?’ 


‘Goodbye,’ Henry said, with a nod. 


‘Goodbye,’ I said. They strolled off and I stood where I was and watched 
them go, walking out of the library in a wide phalanx, side by side. 


When I went by Dr Roland's office a few minutes later to drop off the 
Xeroxes, I asked him if he could give me an advance on my work-study 
check. 


He leaned back in his chair and trained his watery, red-rimmed eyes on me. 
"Well, you know,’ he said, ‘for the past ten years, I've made it my practice not 
to do that. Let me tell you why that is.’ 


'I know, sir,' I said hastily. Dr Roland's discourses on his 'practices' could 
sometimes take half an hour or more. 'I understand. 


Only it's kind of an emergency.’ 


He leaned forward again and cleared his throat. 'And what,’ he said, 'might 
that be?’ 


His hands, folded on the desk before him, were gnarled with veins and had a 
bluish, pearly sheen around the knuckles. I stared at them. I needed ten or 
twenty dollars, needed it badly, but I had come in without first deciding what 
to say. 'I don't know,’ I said. ‘Something has come up.' 


He furrowed his eyebrows impressively. Dr Roland's senile manner was said 
to be a facade; to me it seemed quite genuine but sometimes, when you were 
off your guard, he would display an unexpected flash of lucidity, which — 
though it frequently did not relate to the topic at hand — was evidence that 
rational processes rumbled somewhere in the muddied depths of his 
consciousness. 


‘It's my car,' I said, suddenly inspired. I didn't have a car. 'I need to get it 
fixed.’ 


I had not expected him to inquire further but instead he perked up noticeably. 
"What's the trouble?’ 


‘Something with the transmission. ' 
'Is it dual-pathed? Air-cooled?’ 


‘Air-cooled,’ I said, shifting to the other foot. I did not care for this 
conversational turn. I don't know a thing about cars and am hard-pressed to 
change a tire. 


"What've you got, one of those little V-6 numbers?’ 
"Yes. 


Tm not surprised. All the kids seem to crave them." 


I had no idea how to respond to this. 


He pulled out his desk drawer and began to pick things up and bring them 
close to his eyes and put them back in again. 


‘Once a transmission goes,’ he said, 'in my experience the car is gone. 
Especially on a V-6. You might as well take that vehicle to the junk heap. 
Now, myself, I've got a '98 Regency Brougham, ten years old. With me, it's 
regular checkups, new filter every fifteen hundred miles, and new oil every 
three thousand. Runs a dream. Watch out for these garages in town,’ he said 


sharply. 
‘Pardon?’ 


He'd found his checkbook at last. "Well, you ought to go to the Bursar but I 
guess this'll be all right,’ he said, opening it and beginning to write 
laboriously. ‘Some of these places in Hampden, they find out you're from the 
college, they'll charge you double. Redeemed Repair is generally the best — 
they're a bunch of born-agains down there but they'll still shake you down 
pretty good if you don't keep an eye on them.’ 


He tore out the check and handed it to me. I glanced at it and my heart 
skipped a beat. Two hundred dollars. He'd signed it and everything. 


‘Don't you let them charge you a penny more,’ he said. 


'No sir,’ I said, barely able to conceal my joy. What would I do with all this 
money? Maybe he would even forget he had given it to me. 


He pulled down his glasses and looked at me over the tops of them. "That's 
Redeemed Repair,’ he said. They're out on Highway 6. The sign is shaped like 
a cross. 


"Thank you,' I said. 


I walked down the hall with spirits soaring, and two hundred dollars in my 
pocket, and the first thing I did was to go downstairs to the pay phone and call 
a cab to take me into Hampden town. 


If there's one thing I'm good at, it's lying on my feet. It's sort of a gift I have. 


And what did I do in Hampden town? Frankly, I was too staggered by my 
good fortune to do much of anything. It was a glorious day; I was sick of 
being poor, so, before I thought better of it, I went into an expensive men's 
shop on the square and bought a couple of shirts. Then I went down to the 
Salvation Army and poked around in bins for a while and found a Harris 


tweed overcoat and a pair of brown wingtips that fit me, also some cufflinks 
and a funny old tie that had pictures of men hunting Jeer on it. When I came 
out of the store I was happy to find that I still had nearly a hundred dollars. 
Should I go to the bookstore? 


To the movies? Buy a bottle of Scotch? In the end, I was so swarmed by the 
flock of possibilities that drifted up murmuring and smiling to crowd about me 
on the bright autumn sidewalk that — like a farm boy flustered by a bevy of 
prostitutes —1 brushed right through them, to the pay phone on the corner, to 
call a cab to take me to school. 


Once in my room, I spread the clothes on my bed. The cufflinks were beaten 
up and had someone else's initials on them, but they looked like real gold, 
glinting in the drowsy autumn sun which poured through the window and 
soaked in yellow pools on the oak floor — voluptuous, rich, intoxicating. 


I had a feeling of deja vu when, the next afternoon, Julian answered the door 
exactly as he had the first time, by opening it only a crack and looking through 
it warily, as if there were something wonderful in his office that needed 
guarding, something that he was careful not everyone should see. It was a 
feeling I would come to know well in the next months. Even now, years later 
and far away, sometimes in dreams I find myself standing before that white 
door, waiting for him to appear like the gatekeeper in a fairy story: ageless, 
watchful, sly as a child. 


When he saw it was me, he opened the door slightly wider than he had the 
first time. 'Mr Pepin again, isn't it?’ he said. 


I didn't bother to correct him. 'I'm afraid so.' 


He looked at me for a moment. 'You have a wonderful name, you know,’ he 
said. "There were kings of France named Pepin. 


‘Are you busy now?’ 


‘I am never too busy for an heir to the French throne if that is in fact what 
you are,' he said pleasantly. 


T'm afraid not.’ 


He laughed and quoted a little Greek epigram about honesty being a 
dangerous virtue, and, to my surprise, opened the door and ushered me in. 


It was a beautiful room, not an office at all, and much bigger than it looked 
from outside — airy and white, with a high ceiling and a breeze fluttering in the 
starched curtains. In the corner, near a low bookshelf, was a big round table 


littered with teapots and Greek books, and there were flowers everywhere, 
roses and carnations and anemones, on his desk, on the table, in the 
windowsills. The roses were especially fragrant; their smell hung rich and 
heavy in the air, mingled with the smell of bergamot, and black China tea, and 
a faint inky scent of camphor. Breathing deep, I felt intoxicated. Everywhere I 
looked was something beautiful — Oriental rugs, porcelains, tiny paintings like 
jewels a dazzle of fractured color that struck me as if I had stepped into one of 
those little Byzantine churches that are so plain on the outside; inside, the 
most paradisal painted eggshell of gilt and tesserae. 


He sat in an armchair by the window and motioned for me to sit, too. 'I 
suppose you've come about the Greek class,' he said. 


'Yes.' 


His eyes were kind, frank, more gray than blue. ‘It's rather late in the term, 
he said. 


Td like to study it again. It seems a shame to drop it after two years.' 


He arched his eyebrows — deep, mischievous — and looked at his folded 
hands for a moment. 'I'm told you're from California.’ 


"Yes, I am,'I said, rather startled. Who had told him that? 


'I don't know many people from the West,’ he said. 'I don't know if I would 
like it there.’ He paused, looking pensive and vaguely troubled. 'And what do 
you do in California?’ 


I gave him the spiel. Orange groves, failed movie stars, lamplit cocktail 
hours by the swimming pool, cigarettes, ennui. He listened, his eyes fixed on 
mine, apparently entranced by these fraudulent recollections. Never had my 
efforts met with such attentiveness, such keen solicitude. He seemed so utterly 
enthralled that I was tempted to embroider a little more than perhaps was 
prudent. 


"How thrilling,’ he said warmly when I, half-euphoric, was finally played out. 
"How very romantic.’ 


"Well, we're all quite used to it out there, you see,’ I said, trying not to fidget, 
flushed with the brilliance of my success. 


‘And what does a person with such a romantic temperament seek in the study 
of the classics?' He asked this as if, having had the good fortune to catch such 
a rare bird as myself, he was anxious to extract my opinion while I was still 
captive in his office. 


‘If by romantic you mean solitary and introspective,’ I said, 'I think romantics 
are frequently the best classicists.' 


He laughed. 'The great romantics are often failed classicists. 


But that's beside the point, isn't it? What do you think of Hamp den? Are you 
happy here?’ 


I provided an exegesis, not as brief as it might have been, of why at the 
moment I found the college satisfactory for my purposes. 


"Young people often find the country a bore,’ said Julian. 


"Which is not to say that it isn't good for them. Have you traveled much? Tell 
me what it was that attracted you to this place. I should think a young man 
such as yourself would be at a loss outside the city, but perhaps you feel tired 
of city life, is that so?’ 


So skillfully and engagingly that I was quite disarmed, he led me deftly from 
topic to topic, and I am sure that in this talk, which seemed only a few 
minutes but was really much longer, he managed to extract everything about 
me he wanted to know. 


I did not suspect that his rapt interest might spring from anything less than 
the very richest enjoyment of my own company, and though I found myself 
talking with relish on a bewildering variety of topics — some of them quite 
personal, and with more frankness than was customary — I was convinced that 
I was acting of my own volition. I wish I could remember more of what was 
said that day — actually, I do remember much of what ,' said, most of it too 
fatuous for me to recall with pleasure. The only point at which he differed 
(aside from an incredulous eyebrow raised at my mention of Picasso; when I 
came to know him better I realized that he must have thought this an almost 
personal affront) was on the topic of psychology, which was, after all, heavy 
on my mind, working for Dr Roland and everything. 


"But do you really think,’ he said, concerned, 'that one can call psychology a 
science?’ 


‘Certainly. What else is it?’ 


‘But even Plato knew that class and conditioning and so forth have an 
inalterable effect on the individual. It seems to me that psychology is only 
another word for what the ancients called fate.’ 


‘Psychology is a terrible word.’ 


He agreed vigorously. ‘Yes, it is terrible, isn't it?’ he said, but with an 
expression that indicated that he thought it rather tasteless of me even to use 
it. "Perhaps in certain ways it is a helpful construct in talking about a certain 
kind of mind. The country people who live around me are fascinating because 
their lives are so closely bound to fate that they really are predestined. But' he 
laughed — 'I'm afraid my students are never very interesting to me because I 
always know exactly what they're going to do.' 


I was charmed by his conversation, and despite its illusion of being rather 
modern and digressive (to me, the hallmark of the modern mind is that it loves 
to wander from its subject) I now see that he was leading me by 
circumlocution to the same points again and again. For if the modern mind is 
whimsical and discursive, the classical mind is narrow, unhesitating, 
relentless. 


It is not a quality of intelligence that one encounters frequently these days. 
But though I can digress with the best of them, I am nothing in my soul if not 
obsessive. 


We talked a while longer, and presently fell silent. After a moment Julian 
said courteously, 'If you'd like, I'd be happy to take you as a pupil, Mr Papen. 


I, looking out the window and having half-forgotten why I was there, turned 
to gape at him and couldn't think of a thing to say. 


"However, before you accept, there are a few conditions to which you must 
agree.’ 


"What?' I said, suddenly alert. 


"Will you go to the Registrar's office tomorrow and put in a request to change 
counselors?’ He reached for a pen in a cup on his desk; amazingly, it was full 
of Montblanc fountain pens, Meisterstiicks, at least a dozen of them. Quickly 
he wrote out a note and handed it to me. 'Don't lose it,’ he said, ‘because the 
Registrar never assigns me counselees unless I request them.' 


The note was written in a masculine, rather nineteenth century hand, with 
Greek e's. The ink was still wet. 'But I have a counselor,’ I said. 


‘It is my policy never to accept a pupil unless I am his counselor as well. 
Other members of the literature faculty disagree with my teaching methods 
and you will run into problems if someone else gains the power to veto my 
decisions. You should pick up some drop-add forms as well. I think you are 
going to have to drop all the classes you are currently taking, except the 
French, which would be as well for you to keep. You appear to be deficient in 
the area of modern languages.’ 


I was astonished. 'I can't drop all my classes. 
"Why not?’ 
‘Registration is over. 


‘That doesn't matter at all,’ said Julian serenely. "The classes that I want you 
to pick up will be with me. You will probably be taking three or four classes 
with me per term for the rest of your time here.’ 


I looked at him. No wonder he had only five students. 'But how can I do 
that?’ I said. 


He laughed. Tm afraid you haven't been at Hampden very long. The 
administration doesn't like it much, but there's nothing they can do. 
Occasionally they try to raise problems with distribution requirements but 
that's never caused any real trouble. 


We study art, history, philosophy, all sorts of things. If I find you are 
deficient in a given area, 1 may decide to give you a tutorial, perhaps refer 
you to another teacher. As French is not my first language, I think it wise if 
you continue to study that with Mr Laforgue. Next year I'll start you on Latin. 
It's a difficult language, but knowing Greek will make it easier for you. The 
most satisfying of languages, Latin. You will find it a delight to learn.’ 


I listened, a bit affronted by his tone. To do what he asked was tantamount to 
my transferring entirely out of Hampden College into his own little academy 
of ancient Greek, student body five, six including me. 'All my classes with 
you?’ I said. 


"Not quite all of them,' he said seriously, and then laughed when he saw the 
look on my face. 'I believe that having a great diversity of teachers is harmful 
and confusing for a young mind, in the same way I believe that it is better to 
know one book intimately than a hundred superficially,’ he said. 'I know the 
modern world tends not to agree with me, but after all, Plato had only one 
teacher, and Alexander.’ 


Slowly I nodded, trying as I did so to think of a tactful way to withdraw, 
when my eyes met his and suddenly I thought: Why not? I was slightly giddy 
with the force of his personality but the extremism of the offer was appealing 
as well. His students — if they were any mark of his tutelage — were imposing 
enough, and different as they all were they shared a certain coolness, a cruel, 
mannered charm which was not modern in the least but had a strange cold 
breath of the ancient world: they were magnificent creatures, such eyes, such 
hands, such looks — sic oculos, sic ilk manus, sic oraferebat. I envied them, 
and found them attractive; moreover this strange quality, far from being 


natural, gave every indication of having been intensely cultivated. (It was the 
same, I would come to find, with Julian: though he gave quite the opposite 
impression, of freshness and candor, it was not spontaneity but superior art 
which made it seem unstudied.) Studied or not, I wanted to be like them. It 
was heady to think that these qualities were acquired ones and that, perhaps, 
this was the way I might learn them. 


This was all a long way from Piano, and my father's gas station. 'And if I do 
take classes with you, will they all be in Greek?’ I asked him. 


He laughed. 'Of course not. We'll be studying Dante, Virgil, all sorts of 
things. But I wouldn't advise you to go out and buy a copy of Goodbye, 
Columbus' (required, notoriously, in one of the freshman English classes) 'if 
you will forgive me for being vulgar.’ 


Georges Laforgue was disturbed when I told him what I planned to do. "This 
is a serious business,’ he said. 'You understand, don't you, how limited will be 
your contact with the rest of the faculty and with the school?’ 


"He's a good teacher,’ I said. 


"No teacher is that good. And if you should by chance have a disagreement 
with him, or be treated unjustly in any way, there will be nothing anyone on 
the faculty can do for you. Pardon me, but I do not see the point of paying a 
thirty-thousand-dollar tuition simply to study with one instructor.’ 


I thought of referring that question to the Hampden College Endowment 
Fund, but I said nothing. 


He leaned back in his chair. 'Forgive me, but I should think the elitist values 
of such a man would be repugnant to you,’ he said. ‘Frankly, this is the first 
time I have ever heard of his accepting a pupil who is on such considerable 
financial aid. Being a democratic institution, Hampden College is not founded 
on such principles. 


"Well, he can't be all that elitist if he accepted me,’ I said. 


He didn't catch my sarcasm. 'I am willing to speculate that he isn't aware you 
are on assistance,’ he said seriously. Jj 'Well, if he doesn't know,’ I said, 'I'm 
not going to tell him." 


Julian's classes met in his office. They were very small classes, and besides, 
no classroom could have approached it in terms of comfort, or privacy. He 
had a theory that pupils learned better in a pleasant, non-scholastic 
atmosphere; and that luxurious hothouse of a room, flowers everywhere in the 
dead of winter, was some sort of Platonic microcosm of what he thought a 


schoolroom should be. ("'Work?' he said to me once, astonished, when I 
referred to our classroom activities as such. 'Do you really think that what we 
do is work?’ 


"What else should I call it?’ 
'I should call it the most glorious kind of play.' 


As I was on my way there for my first class, I saw Francis Abernathy 
stalking across the meadow like a black bird, his coat flapping dark and 
crowlike in the wind. He was preoccupied, smoking a cigarette, but the 
thought that he might see me filled me with an inexplicable anxiety. I ducked 
into a doorway and waited until he had passed. 


When I turned on the landing of the Lyceum stairs, I was shocked to see him 
sitting in the windowsill. I glanced at him quickly, and then quickly away, and 
was about to walk into the hall when he said, 'Wait.' His voice was cool and 
Bostonian, almost British. 


I turned around. 

‘Are you the new neanias T he said mockingly. 
The new young man. I said that I was. 
‘Cubitum eamus?' 

"What?' 

"Nothing. 


He transferred the cigarette to his left hand and offered the right one to me. It 
was bony and soft-skinned as a teenage girl's. 


He did not bother to introduce himself. After a brief, awkward silence, I told 
him my name. 


He took a last drag of the cigarette and tossed it out the open window. 'I 
know who you are,' he said. 


Henry and Bunny were already in the office; Henry was reading a book and 
Bunny, leaning across the table, was talking to him loudly and earnestly. 


'... tasteless, that's what it is, old man. Disappointed in you. 


I gave you credit for a little more savoir faire than that, if you don't mind my 
saying so...» 


‘Good morning,’ said Francis, coming in behind me and closing the door. 
Henry glanced up and nodded, then went back to his book. 


‘Hi,’ said Bunny, and then 'Oh, hello there’ to me. 'Guess what,’ he continued 
to Francis. 'Henry bought himself a Mont blanc pen. 


‘Really?’ said Francis. 


Bunny nodded at the cup of sleek black pens that sat on Julian's desk. 'I told 
him he better be careful or Julian will think he stole it.' 


"He was with me when I bought it,’ said Henry without looking up from his 
book. 


"How much are those things worth, anyway?’ said Bunny. 
No answer. 


‘Come on. How much? Three hundred bucks a pop?' He leaned all of his 
considerable weight against the table. 'I remember when you used to say how 
ugly they were. You used to say you'd never write with a thing in your life but 
a straight pen. Right?’ 


Silence. 
"Let me see that again, will you?’ Bunny said. 


Putting his book down, Henry reached in his breast pocket and pulled out the 
pen and put it on the table. 'There,’ he said. 


Bunny picked it up and turned it back and forth in his fingers. 


‘It's like the fat pencils I used to use in first grade,’ he said. 'Did Julian talk 
you into getting this?’ 


'I wanted a fountain pen. 

That's not why you got this one.’ 

'I am sick of talking about this.’ 

'I think it's tasteless.’ 

"You,' said Henry sharply, ‘are not one to speak of taste.’ 


There was a long silence, during which Bunny leaned back in his chair. 


‘Now, what kind of pens do we all use here?’ he said conversationally. 
‘Francois, you're a nib-and-bottle man like myself, no?’ 


"More or less.’ 


He pointed to me as if he were the host of a panel discussion on a talk show. 
‘And you, what's-your-name, Robert? What sort of pens did they teach you to 
use in California?’ 


‘Ball points,’ I said. 


Bunny nodded deeply. 'An honest man, gentlemen. Simple tastes. Lays his 
cards on the table. I like that.’ 


The door opened and the twins came in. 


"What are you yelling about, Bun?’ said Charles, laughing, kicking the door 
shut behind him. 'We heard you all the way down the hall.’ 


Bunny launched into the story about the Montblanc pen. 


Uneasily, I edged into the corner and began to examine the books in the 
bookcase. 


"How long have you studied the classics?’ said a voice at my elbow. It was 
Henry, who had turned in his chair to look at me. 


"Two years,’ I said. 

"What have you read in Greek?’ 

'The New Testament.’ 

"Well, of course you've read Koine,' he said crossly. "What else? 
Homer, surely. And the lyric poets.’ 

This, I knew, was Henry's special bailiwick. I was afraid to lie. 
'A little.’ 

‘And Plato?! 

"Yes. 

"All of Plato?’ 


"Some of Plato.’ 


‘But all of it in translation.’ 
I hesitated, a moment too long. He looked at me, incredulous. 'No?' 


I dug my hands into the pockets of my new overcoat. 'Most of it,’ I said, 
which was far from true. 


"Most of what? The dialogues, you mean? What about later things? Plotinus?’ 
"Yes,' I lied. I have never, to this day, read a word by Plotinus. 
"What?' 


Unfortunately my mind went blank, and I could not think of a single thing I 
knew for sure Plotinus had written. The Eclogues'! No, dammit, that was 
Virgil. ‘Actually, I don't much care for Plotinus,' I said. 


"No? Why is that?’ 


He was like a policeman with the questions. Wistfully, I thought of my old 
class, the one I'd dropped for this one: Intro to Drama, with jolly Mr Lanin, 
who made us lie on the floor and do relaxation exercises while he walked 
around and said things like: 'Now imagine that your body is filling with a cool 
orange fluid.’ 


I had not answered the Plotinus question soon enough for Henry's taste. He 
said something rapidly in Latin. 


'I beg your pardon?’ 
He looked at me coldly. 'Never mind,’ he said, and bent back over his book. 
To hide my consternation, I turned to the bookshelf. 


"Happy now?’ I heard Bunny say. 'I guess you raked him over the coals pretty 
good, eh?’ 


To my intense relief, Charles came over to say hello. He was friendly and 
quite calm, but we had scarcely more than exchanged greetings when the door 
opened and a hush fell as Julian slipped in and closed the door quietly behind 
him. 


‘Good morning,’ he said. "You've met our new student?’ 


"Yes,' said Francis in what I thought a bored tone, as he held out Camilla's 
chair and then slid into his own. 


"Wonderful. Charles, would you put on water for tea?’ 


Charles went into a little anteroom, no bigger than a closet, and I heard the 
sound of running water. (I never did know exactly what was in that anteroom 
or how Julian, upon occasion, was miraculously able to convey four-course 
meals out of it.) Then he came out, closing the door behind him, and sat 
down. 


‘All right,’ said Julian, looking around the table. 'I hope we're all ready to 
leave the phenomenal world, and enter into the sublime?’ 


He was a marvelous talker, a magical talker, and I wish I were able to give a 
better idea what he said, but it is impossible for a mediocre intellect to render 
the speech of a superior one — especially after so many years — without losing 
a good deal in the translation. The discussion that day was about loss of self, 
about Plato's four divine madnesses, about madness of all sorts; he began by 
talking about what he called the burden of the self, and why people want to 
lose the self in the first place. 


"Why does that obstinate little voice in our heads torment us so?’ he said, 
looking round the table. 'Could it be because it reminds us that we are alive, of 
our mortality, of our individual souls — which, after all, we are too afraid to 
surrender but yet make us feel more miserable than any other thing? But isn't 
it also pain that often makes us most aware of self? It is a terrible thing to 
learn as a child that one is a being separate from all the world, that no one and 
no thing hurts along with one's burned tongues and skinned knees, that one's 
aches and pains are all one's own. Even more terrible, as we grow older, to 
learn that no person, no matter how beloved, can ever truly understand us. 


Our own selves make us most unhappy, and that's why we're so anxious to 
lose them, don't you think? Remember the Erinyes?' 


The Furies,’ said Bunny, his eyes dazzled and lost beneath the bang of hair. 


‘Exactly. And how did they drive people mad? They turned up the volume of 
the inner monologue, magnified qualities already present to great excess, 
made people so much themselves that they couldn't stand it. 


‘And how can we lose this maddening self, lose it entirely? 


Love? Yes, but as old Cephalus once heard Sophocles say, the least of us 
know that love is a cruel and terrible master. One loses oneself for the sake of 
the other, but in doing so becomes enslaved and miserable to the most 
capricious of all the gods. War? One can lose oneself in the joy of battle, in 
fighting for a glorious cause, but there are not a great many glorious causes 
for which to fight these days.' He laughed. 'Though after all your Xenophon 


and Thucydides I dare say there are not many young people better versed in 
military tactics. I'm sure, if you wanted to, you'd be quite capable of marching 
on Hampden town and taking it over by yourselves.’ 


Henry laughed. 'We could do it this afternoon, with six men,' he said. 
'How?' said everyone at once. 


‘One person to cut the phone and power lines, one at the bridge over the 
Battenkill, one at the main road out, to the north. The rest of us could advance 
from the south and west. There aren't many of us, but if we scattered we'd be 
able to close off all other points of entry’ — here he held out his hand, fingers 
spread wide 'and advance to the center from all points.' The fingers closed into 
a fist. 'Of course, we'd have the advantage of surprise,’ he said, and I felt an 
unexpected thrill at the coldness of his voice. 


Julian laughed. 'And how many years has it been since the gods have 
intervened in human wars? I expect Apollo and Athena Nike would come 
down to fight at your side, «invited or uninvited,» as the oracle at Delphi said 
to the Spartans. Imagine what heroes you'd be.' 


‘Demigods,’ said Francis, laughing. "We could sit on thrones in the town 
square,’ "While the local merchants paid you tribute.’ 


‘Gold. Peacocks and ivory.’ 
‘Cheddar cheese and common crackers more like it,’ Bunny said. 


"Bloodshed is a terrible thing,’ said Julian hastily — the remark about the 
common crackers had displeased him — 'but the bloodiest parts of Homer and 
Aeschylus are often the most magnificent — for example, that glorious speech 
of Klytemnestra's in the Agamemnon that I love so much — Camilla, you were 
our Klytem nestra when we did the Oresteia; do you remember any of it?’ 


The light from the window was streaming directly into her face; in such 
strong light most people look somewhat washed out, but her clear, fine 
features were only illuminated until it was a shock to look at her, at her pale 
and radiant eyes with their sooty lashes, at the gold glimmer at her temple that 
blended gradually into her glossy hair, warm as honey. 'I remember a little,’ 
she said. 


Looking at a spot on the wall above my head, she began to recite the lines. I 
stared at her. Did she have a boyfriend, Francis maybe? He and she were 
fairly chummy, but Francis didn't look like the sort who would be too 
interested in girls. Not that I stood much of a chance, surrounded as she was 
by all these clever rich boys in dark suits; me, with my clumsy hands and 


suburban ways. 
Her voice in Greek was harsh and low and lovely. 


Thus he died, and all the life struggled out of him; and as he died he 
spattered me with the dark red and violent-driven rain of bitter-savored blood 
to make me glad, as gardens stand among the showers of God in glory at the 
birthtime of the buds. 


There was a brief silence after she had finished; rather to my surprise, Henry 
winked solemnly at her from across the table. 


Julian smiled. 'What a beautiful passage,’ he said. 'I never tire of it. But how 
is it that such a ghastly thing, a queen stabbing her husband in his bath, is so 
lovely to us?’ 


‘It's the meter,’ said Francis. 'lambic trimeter. Those really hideous parts of 
Inferno, for instance, Pier de Medicina with his nose hacked off and talking 
through a bloody slit in his windpipe ' 


'I can think of worse than that,' Charles said. 


‘So can I. But that passage is lovely and it's because of the terza rima. The 
music of it. The trimeter tolls through that speech of Klytemnestra's like a 
bell.’ 


‘But iambic trimeter is fairly common in Greek lyric, isn't it?’ said Julian. 
"Why is that particular section so breathtaking? Why do we not find ourselves 
attracted to some calmer or more pleasing one?’ 


‘Aristotle says in the Poetics,’ said Henry, ‘that objects such as corpses, 
painful to view in themselves, can become delightful to contemplate in a work 
of art.’ 


‘And I believe Aristotle is correct. After all, what are the scenes in poetry 
graven on our memories, the ones that we love the most? Precisely these. The 
murder of Agamemnon and the wrath of Achilles. Dido on the funeral pyre. 
The daggers of the traitors and Caesar's blood — remember how Suetonius 
describes his body being borne away on the litter, with one arm hanging 
down?’ 


"Death is the mother of beauty,’ said Henry. 
‘And what is beauty?’ 


‘Terror,’ 'Well said,’ said Julian. "Beauty is rarely soft or consolatory. 


Quite the contrary. Genuine beauty is always quite alarming.’ 


I looked at Camilla, her face bright in the sun, and thought of that line from 
the Iliad I love so much, about Pallas Athene and the terrible eyes shining. 


‘And if beauty is terror,’ said Julian, 'then what is desire? We think we have 
many desires, but in fact we have only one. What is it?’ 


'To live,' said Camilla. 
'To live forever,’ said Bunny, chin cupped in palm. 
The teakettle began to whistle. 


Once the cups were set out, and Henry had poured the tea, somber as a 
mandarin, we began to talk about the madnesses induced by the gods: poetic, 
prophetic, and, finally, Dionysian. 


"Which is by far the most mysterious,’ said Julian. 'We have been accustomed 
to thinking of religious ecstasy as a thing found only in primitive societies, 
though it frequently occurs in the most cultivated peoples. The Greeks, you 
know, really weren't very different from us. They were a very formal people, 
extraordinarily civilized, rather repressed. And yet they were frequently swept 
away en masse by the wildest enthusiasms — dancing, frenzies, slaughter, 
visions — which for us, I suppose, would seem clinical madness, irreversible. 
Yet the Greeks — some of them, anyway — could go in and out of it as they 
pleased. We cannot dismiss these accounts entirely as myth. They are quite 
well documented, though ancient commentators were as mystified by them as 
we are. Some say they were the results of prayer and fasting, others that they 
were brought about by drink. Certainly the group nature of the hysteria had 
something to do with it as well. Even so, it is hard to account for the 
extremism of the phenomenon. The revelers were apparently hurled back into 
a non-rational, pre-intellectual state, where the personality was replaced by 
something completely different — and by «different» I mean something to all 
appearances not mortal.Inhuman,' 


I thought of the Bacchae, a play whose violence and savagery made me 
uneasy, as did the sadism of its bloodthirsty god. 


Compared to the other tragedies, which were dominated by I recognizable 
principles of justice no matter how harsh, it was a triumph of barbarism over 
reason: dark, chaotic, inexplicable. 


"We don't like to admit it,’ said Julian, 'but the idea of losing control is one 
that fascinates controlled people such as ourselves more than almost anything. 
All truly civilized people — the ancients no less than us — have civilized 


themselves through the willful repression of the old, animal self. Are we, in 
this room, really very different from the Greeks or the Romans? Obsessed 
with duty, piety, loyalty, sacrifice? All those things which are to modern tastes 
so chilling?’ 


I looked around the table at the six faces. To modern tastes they were 
somewhat chilling. I imagine any other teacher would've been on the phone to 
Psychological Counseling in about five minutes had he heard what Henry said 
about arming the Greek class and marching into Hampden town. 


‘And it's a temptation for any intelligent person, and especially for 
perfectionists such as the ancients and ourselves, to try to murder the 
primitive, emotive, appetitive self. But that is a mistake.’ 


'Why?' said Francis, leaning slightly forward. 


Julian arched an eyebrow; his long, wise nose gave his profile a forward tilt, 
like an Etruscan in a bas-relief. 'Because it is dangerous to ignore the 
existence of the irrational. The more cultivated a person is, the more 
intelligent, the more repressed, then the more he needs some method of 
channeling the primitive impulses he's worked so hard to subdue. Otherwise 
those powerful old forces will mass and strengthen until they are violent 
enough to break free, more violent for the delay, often strong enough to sweep 
the will away entirely. For a warning of what happens in the absence of such a 
pressure valve, we have the example of the Romans. The emperors. Think, for 
example, of Tiberius, the ugly stepson, trying to live up to the command of his 
stepfather Augustus. Think of the tremendous, impossible strain he must have 
undergone, following in the footsteps of a savior, a god. The people hated 
him. No matter how hard he tried he was never good enough, could never be 
rid of the hateful self, and finally the floodgates broke. He was swept away on 
his perversions and he died, old and mad, lost in the pleasure gardens of 
Capri: not even happy there, as one might hope, but miserable. 


Before he died he wrote a letter home to the Senate. «May all the Gods and 
Goddesses visit me with more utter destruction than I feel I am daily 
suffering.» Think of those who came after him. Caligula. Nero." 


He paused. 'The Roman genius, and perhaps the Roman flaw,’ he said, 'was 
an obsession with order. One sees it in their architecture, their literature, their 
laws — this fierce denial of darkness, unreason, chaos.' He laughed. 'Easy to 
see why the Romans, usually so tolerant of foreign religions, persecuted the 
Christians mercilessly — how absurd to think a common criminal had risen 
from the dead, how appalling that his followers celebrated him by drinking his 
blood. The illogic of it frightened them and they did everything they could to 
crush it. In fact, I think the reason they took such drastic steps was because 


they were not only frightened but also terribly attracted to it. Pragma tists are 
often strangely superstitious. For all their logic, who lived in more abject 
terror of the supernatural than the Romans? 


'The Greeks were different. They had a passion for order and symmetry, 
much like the Romans, but they knew how foolish it was to deny the unseen 
world, the old gods. Emotion, darkness, barbarism.’ He looked at the ceiling 
for a moment, his face almost troubled. 'Do you remember what we were 
speaking of earlier, of how bloody, terrible things are sometimes the most 
beautiful?’ he said. 'It's a very Greek idea, and a very profound one. Beauty is 
terror. Whatever we call beautiful, we quiver before it. And what could be 
more terrifying and beautiful, to souls like the Greeks or our own, than to lose 
control completely? To throw off the chains of being for an instant, to shatter 
the accident of our mortal selves? Euripides speaks of the Maenads: head 
thrown I back, throat to the stars, «more like deer than human being.» To be 
absolutely free! One is quite capable, of course, of working out these 
destructive passions in more vulgar and less efficient ways. But how glorious 
to release them in a single burst! To sing, to scream, to dance barefoot in the 
woods in the dead of night, with no more awareness of mortality than an 
animal! These are powerful mysteries. The bellowing of bulls. Springs of 
honey bubbling from the ground. If we are strong enough in our souls we can 
rip away the veil and look that naked, terrible beauty right in the face; let God 
consume us, devour us, unstring our bones. Then spit us out reborn.’ 


We were all leaning forward, motionless. My mouth had fallen open; I was 
aware of every breath I took. 


‘And that, to me, is the terrible seduction of Dionysiac ritual. 
Hard for us to imagine. That fire of pure being.’ 


After class, I wandered downstairs in a dream, my head spinning, but 
acutely, achingly conscious that I was alive and young on a beautiful day; the 
sky a deep deep painful blue, wind scattering the red and yellow leaves in a 
whirlwind of confetti. 


Beauty is terror. Whatever we call beautiful, we quiver before it. 


That night I wrote in my journal: ‘Trees are schizophrenic now and 
beginning to lose control, enraged with the shock of their fiery new colors. 
Someone — was it van Gogh? — said that orange is the color of insanity. 
Beauty is terror. We want to be devoured by it, to hide ourselves in that fire 
which refines us.’ 


I went into the post office (blase students, business as usual) and, still 
preposterously lightheaded, scribbled a picture postcard to my mother — fiery 


maples, a mountain stream. A sentence on the back advised: Plan to see 
Vermont's fall foliage between Sept .25 and Oct. ijth when it is at its vivid 
best. 


As I was putting it in the out-of-town mail slot, I saw Bunny across the 
room, his back to me, scanning the row of numbered boxes. He stopped at 
what was apparently my own box and bent to stick something in it. Then he 
straightened surreptitiously and walked out quickly, his hands in his pockets 
and his hair flopping everywhere. 


I waited until he was gone, then went to my mailbox. Inside, I found a 
cream-colored envelope — thick paper, crisp and very formal — but the 
handwriting was crabbed and childish as a fifth-grader's, in pencil. The note 
within was in pencil, too, tiny and uneven and hard to read: 


Richard old Man What do you Say we have Lunch on Saturday, maybe 
about i? 1 know this Great little place. Cocktails, the business. My treat. 
Please come. 


Yours, Bun p.s. wear a Tie. I am Sure you would have anyway but they will 
drag some godawful one out of the back and meke (s. p.) you Wear it if you 
Dont. 


I examined the note, put it in my pocket, and was walking out when I almost 
bumped into Dr Roland coming in the door. At first he didn't seem to know 
who I was. But just when I thought I was going to get away, the creaky 
machinery of his face began to grind and a cardboard dawn of recognition was 
lowered, with jerks, from the dusty proscenium. 


‘Hello, Doctor Roland,’ I said, abandoning hope. 
"How's she running, boy?’ 


He meant my imaginary car. Christine. Chitty Chitty-Bang Bang. ‘Fine,’ I 
said. 


"Take it to Redeemed Repair?’ 
Yes.’ 
"Manifold trouble.’ 


"Yes,' I said, and then realized I'd told him earlier it was the transmission. But 
Dr Roland had now begun an informative lecture concerning the care and 
function of the manifold gasket. 


‘And that,’ he concluded, 'is one of your major problems with a foreign 
automobile. You can waste a lot of oil that way. Those cans of Penn State will 
add up. And Penn State doesn't grow on trees.’ 


He gave me a significant look. 
"Who was it sold you the gasket?’ he asked. 


I can't remember,’ I said, swaying in a trance of boredom but edging 
imperceptibly towards the door. 


"Was it Bud?’ 

'I think so.' 

‘Or Bill. Bill Hundy is good.' 

'T believe it was Bud,’ I said. 

"What did you think about that old blue jay?’ 


I was uncertain if this referred to Bud or to a literal blue jay, or if, perhaps, 
we were heading into the territory of senile dementia. It was sometimes 
difficult to believe that Dr Roland was a tenured professor in the Social 
Science Department of this, a distinguished college. He was more like some 
gabby old codger who would sit next to you on a bus and try to show you bits 
of paper he kept folded in his wallet. 


He was reviewing some of the information he had previously given me on 
the manifold gaskets and I was waiting for a good moment to remember, 
suddenly, that I was late for an appointment, when Dr Roland's friend Dr 
Blind struggled up, beaming, leaning on his walker. Dr Blind (pronounced 
‘Blend') was about ninety years old and had taught, for the past fifty years, a 
course called ‘Invariant Subspaces' which was noted for its monotony and 
virtually absolute unintelligibility, as well as for the fact that the final exam, 
as long as anyone could remember, had consisted of the same single yes-or-no 
question. The question was three pages long but the answer was always 'Yes.' 
That was all you needed to know to pass Invariant Subspaces. 


He was, if possible, even a bigger windbag than Dr Roland. 


Together, they were like one of those superhero alliances in the comic books, 
invincible, an unconquerable confederation of boredom and confusion. I 
murmured an excuse and slipped away, leaving them to their own formidable 
devices. 


Chapter 2 ^ 


I had hoped the weather would be cool for my lunch with Bunny, because 
my best jacket was a scratchy dark tweed, but when I woke on Saturday it was 
hot and getting hotter. 


‘Gonna be a scorcher today,’ said the janitor as I passed him in the hall. 
‘Indian summer.’ 


The jacket was beautiful — Irish wool, gray with flecks of mossy green; I had 
bought it in San Francisco with nearly every cent I'd saved from my summer 
job — but it was much too heavy for a warm sunny day. I put it on and went to 
the bathroom to straighten my tie. 


I was in no mood for talk and I was unpleasantly surprised to find Judy 
Poovey brushing her teeth at the sink. Judy Poovey lived a couple of doors 
down from me and seemed to think that because she was from Los Angeles 
we had a lot in common. She cornered me in hallways; tried to make me 
dance at parties; had told several girls that she was going to sleep with me, 
only in less delicate terms. She had wild clothes, frosted hair, a red Corvette 
with California plates bearing the legend judy p. Her voice was loud and rose 
frequently to a screech, which rang through the house like the cries of some 
terrifying tropical bird. 


‘Hi, Richard,’ she said, and spit out a mouthful of toothpaste. 


She was wearing cut-off jeans that had bizarre, frantic designs drawn on 
them in Magic Marker and a spandex top which revealed her intensely 
aerobicized midriff. 


‘Hello,’ I said, setting to work on my tie. 

"You look cute today.’ 

'Thanks.' 

‘Got a date?’ 

I looked away from the mirror, at her. 'What?' 
"Where you going?’ 


By now, I was used to her interrogations, ‘Out to lunch. 


"Who with?’ 

"Bunny Corcoran. 

"You know Bunny?’ 

Again, I turned to look at her. 'Sort of. Do you?’ 


‘Sure. He was in my art history class. He's hilarious. I hate that geeky friend 
of his, though, the other one with the glasses, what's his name?’ 


Henry?’ 


"Yeah, him.’ She leaned towards the mirror and began to fluff out her hair, 
swiveling her head this way and that. Her nails were Chanel red but so long 
they had to be the kind you bought at the drugstore. 'I think he's an asshole.’ 


'I kind of like him,’ I said, offended. 


I don't.’ She parted her hair in the center, using the curved talon of her 
forefinger as a comb. 'He's always been a bastard to me. I hate those twins, 
too.’ 


"Why? The twins are nice.' 


‘Oh yeah?’ she said, rolling a mascaraed eye at me in the mirror. 'Listen to 
this. I was at this party last term, really drunk, and sort of slam-dancing, right? 
Everybody was crashing into everybody else, and for some reason this girl 
twin was walking through the dance floor and pow, I slammed right into her, 
really hard. So then she says something rude, like totally uncalled for, and first 
thing I knew I'd thrown my beer in her face. It was that kind of a night. I'd 
already had about six beers thrown on me, and it just seemed like the thing to 
do, you know? 


‘So anyway, she starts yelling at me and in about half a second there's the 
other twin and that Henry guy standing over me like they're about to beat me 
up.’ She pulled her hair back from her face in a ponytail and inspected her 
profile in the mirror. 'So anyway. I'm drunk, and these two guys are leaning 
over me in this menacing way, and you know that I Iciiry, he's really big. It 
was kind of scary but I was too drunk to care so I just told them to fuck off,’ 
She turned from the mirror and smiled brilliantly. 'I was drinking Kamikazes 
that night. Something terrible always happens to me when I drink Kamikazes. 
I wreck my car, I get into fights...» 


"What happened?’ 


She shrugged and turned back to the mirror. 'Like I said, I just told them to 
fuck off. And the boy twin, he starts screaming at me. Like he really wants to 
kill me, you know? And that Henry just standing there, right, but to me he was 
scarier than the other one. So anyway. A friend of mine who used to go here 
and who's really tough, he was in this motorcycle gang, into chains and shit — 
ever heard of Spike Romney?’ 


I had; in fact I'd seen him at my first Friday-night party. He was tremendous, 
well over two hundred pounds, with scars on his hands and steel toe-clips on 
his motorcycle boots. 


"Well, anyway, so Spike comes up and sees these people abusing me, and he 
shoves the twin on the shoulder and tells him to beat it, and before I knew it, 
the two of them had jumped on him. People were trying to pull that Henry off, 
too — lots of them, and they couldn't do it. Six guys couldn't pull him off. 


Broke Spike's collarbone and two of his ribs, and fucked up his face pretty 
bad. I told Spike he should've called the cops, but he was in some kind of 
trouble himself and wasn't supposed to be on campus. It was a bad scene, 
though.’ She let her hair fall back around her face. 'I mean, Spike is tough. 
And mean. You'd think he'd be able to beat the shit out of both those sissy 
guys in suits and ties and stuff.’ 


‘Hmm,’ I said, trying not to laugh. It was funny to think of Henry, with his 
little round glasses and his books in Pali, breaking Spike Romney's 
collarbone. 


‘It's weird,’ said Judy. 'I guess when uptight people like that get mad, they get 
really mad. Like my father.’ 


"Yeah, I guess so,' I said, looking back into the mirror and adjusting the knot 
on my tie. 


"Have a good time,’ she said listlessly, and started out the door. Then she 
stopped. 'Say, aren't you going to get hot in that jacket?’ 


‘Only good one I have.' 
"You want to try on this one I've got?’ 


I turned and looked at her. She was a major in Costume , Design and as such 
had all kinds of peculiar clothing in her room.>j 'Is it yours?’ I said. 


'I stole it from the wardrobe at the Costume shop. I was going to cut it up 
and make, like, a bustier out of it.' *j Great, I thought, but I went along with 
her anyway. H The jacket, unexpectedly, was wonderful — old Brooks 


Brothers, unlined silk, ivory with stripes of peacock green — a little loose, but 
it fit all right. 'Judy,' I said, looking at my cuffs. 


"This is wonderful. You sure you don't mind?’ 


"You can have it,' said Judy. 'I don't have time to do anything with it. I'm too 
busy sewing those damned costumes for fucking As You Like It. It goes up in 
three weeks and I don't know what I'm going to do. I've got all these freshmen 
working for me this term that don't know a sewing machine from a hole in the 
ground.’ 


"By the way, love that jacket, old man,’ Bunny said to me as we were getting 
out of the taxi. ‘Silk, isn't it?’ 


"Yes. It was my grandfather's.’ 


Bunny pinched a piece of the rich, yellowy cloth near the cuff and rubbed it 
back and forth between his fingers. 'Lovely piece,’ he said importantly. 'Not 
quite the thing for this time of year, though. 


'No?' I said. 


"Naw. This is the East Coast, boy. I know they're pretty laissez-faire about 
dress in your neck of the woods, but back here 52. they don't let you run 
around in your bathing suit all year long. 


Blacks and blues, that's the ticket, blacks and blues... Here, let me get that 
door for you. You know, I think you'll like this place. 


Not exactly the Polo Lounge, but for Vermont it's not too bad, do you think?’ 


It was a tiny, beautiful restaurant with white tablecloths and bay windows 
opening onto a cottage garden — hedges and trellised roses, nasturtiums 
bordering the flagstone path. The customers were mostly middle-aged and 
prosperous: ruddy country-lawyer types who, according to the Vermont 
fashion, wore gumshoes with their Hickey-Freeman suits; ladies with frosted 
lipstick and challis skirts, nice looking in a kind of well-tanned, low-key way. 


A couple glanced up at us as we came in, and I was well aware of the 
impression we were making- two handsome college boys, rich fathers and not 
a worry in the world. Though the ladies were mostly old enough to be my 
mother, one or two were actually quite attractive. Nice work if you could get 
it, I thought, imagining some youngish matron with a big house and nothing 
to do and a husband out of town on business all the time. Good dinners, some 
pocket money, maybe even something really big, like a car... 


A waiter sidled up. 'You have a reservation?’ 


‘Corcoran party,’ said Bunny, hands in his pockets, rocking back and forth on 
his heels. "Where's Caspar keeping himself today?’ 


‘On vacation. He'll be back in two weeks.' 
"Well, good for him,’ said Bunny heartily. 
Till tell him you asked for him. 

‘Do that, wouldja?' 


'Caspar's a super guy,’ Bunny said as we followed the waiter to the table. 
"Maitre d'. Big old fellow with moustaches, Austrian or something. And not’ — 
he lowered his voice to a loud whisper ‘not a fag, either, if you can believe 
that. Queers love to work in restaurants, have you ever noticed that? I mean, 
every single fag ' 


I saw the back of our waiter's neck stiffen slightly. 


'— I have ever known has been obsessed with food. I wonder, why is that? 
Something psychological? It seems to me that ' 


I put a finger to my lips and nodded at the waiter's back, just as he turned and 
gave us an unspeakably evil look. 


‘Is this table all right, gentlemen?’ he said. 
‘Sure,’ said Bunny, beaming. 


The waiter presented our menus with affected, sarcastic delicacy and stalked 
off. I sat down and opened the wine list, my face burning. Bunny, settling in 
his chair, took a sip of water and looked around happily. 'This is a great place,’ 
he said. 


It's nice.' 


‘But not the Polo,’ He rested an elbow on the table and raked the hair back 
from his eyes. 'Do you go there often? The Polo, I mean.’ 


"Not much.’ I'd never even heard of it, which was perhaps understandable as 
it was about four hundred miles from where I lived. 


‘Seems like the kinda place you'd go with your father,’ said Bunny pensively. 
‘For man-to-man talks and stuff. My dad's like that about the Oak Bar at the 
Plaza. He took me and my brothers there to buy us our first drink when we 


turned eighteen.’ 


I am an only child; people's siblings interest me. 'Brothers?' I said. 'How 
many?’ 


‘Four. Teddy, Hugh, Patrick and Brady.’ He laughed. 'It was terrible when 
Dad took me because I'm the baby, and it was such a big thing, and he was all 
«Here, son, have your first drink» and «Won't be long before you're sitting in 
my place» and «Probably I'll be dead soon» and all that kind of junk. And the 
whole time there I was scared stiff. About a month before, my buddy Cloke 
and I had come up from Saint Jerome's for the day to work on a history 
project at the library, and we'd run up a huge bill at the Oak Bar and slipped 
off without paying. You know, boyish spirits, but there I was again, with my 
dad.' 


‘Did they recognize you?’ 


"Yep,' he said grimly. 'Knew they would. But they were pretty decent about 
it. Didn't say anything, just tacked the old bill onto my dad's.’ 


I tried to picture the scene: the drunken old father, in a three-piece suit, 
swishing his Scotch or whatever it was he drank around in the glass. And 
Bunny. He looked a little soft but it was the softness of muscle gone to flesh. 
A big boy, the sort who played football in high school. And the sort of son 
every father secretly wants: big and good-natured and not awfully bright, fond 
of sports, gifted at backslapping and corny jokes. 'Did he notice?’ 


I said. 'Your dad?’ 


"Naw. He was three sheets to the wind. If I'd of been the bartender at the Oak 
Room he wouldn't have noticed.’ 


The waiter was heading towards us again. 


"Look, here comes Twinkletoes,' said Bunny, busying himself with the menu. 
‘Know what you want to eat?’ 


"What's in that, anyway?’ I asked Bunny, leaning to look at the drink the 
waiter had brought him. It was the size of a small fishbowl, bright coral, with 
colored straws and paper parasols and bits of fruit sticking out of it at frenetic 
angles. 


Bunny pulled out one of the parasols and licked the end of it. 


‘Lots of stuff. Rum, cranberry juice, coconut milk, triple sec, peach brandy, 
creme de menthe, I don't know what all. Taste it, it's good.’ 


"No thanks. 

‘C'mon.’ 

"That's okay.’ 

‘C'mon.’ 

"No thank you, I don't want any,’ I said. 


‘First time I ever had one of these was when I was in Jamaica, two summers 
ago,’ said Bunny reminiscently. ‘Bartender named Sam cooked it up for me. 
«Drink three of these, son,» he said, «and you won't be able to find the door» 
and bless me, I couldn't. 


Ever been to Jamaica?’ 
"Not recently, no. 


‘Probably you're used to palm trees and coconuts and all that sort of thing, in 
California and all. ,’ thought it was wonderful. 


Bought a pink bathing suit with flowers on it and everything. 


Tried to get Henry to come down there with me but he said there was no 
culture, which I don't think is true, they did have | some kind of a little 
museum or something.’ 3 'You get along with Henry?’ 


‘Oh, sure thing,’ said Bunny, reared back in his chair. 'We were roommates. 
Freshman year.’ 


"And you like him?' 
‘Certainly, certainly. He's a hard fellow to live with, though. 


Hates noise, hates company, hates a mess. None of this bringing your date 
back to the room to listen to a couple Art Pepper records, if you know what 
I'm trying to get at.' 


'I think he's sort of rude.’ 


Bunny shrugged. 'That's his way. See, his mind doesn't work the same way 
yours and mine do. He's always up in the clouds with Plato or something. 
Works too hard, takes himself too seriously, studying Sanskrit and Coptic and 
those other nutty languages. Henry, I tell him, if you're going to waste your 
time learning something besides Greek — that and the King's English are all I 
think a man needs, personally — why don't you buy yourself some Berlitz 


records and brush up on your French. Find a little cancan girl or something. 
Voolay-voo coushay avec moi and all that.’ 


"How many languages does he know?’ 
'I lost count. Seven or eight. He can read hieroglyphics.’ 
"Wow.' 


Bunny shook his head fondly. 'He's a genius, that boy. He could be a 
translator for the UN if he wanted to be.' 


"Where's he from?’ 
"Missouri. 
He said this in such a deadpan way I thought he was joking, and I laughed. 


Bunny raised an amused eyebrow. ‘What? You thought he was from 
Buckingham Palace or something?’ 


I shrugged, still laughing. Henry was so peculiar, it was hard to imagine him 
being from anyplace. 


"Yep,’ said Bunny. 'The Show-Me State. St Louis boy like old Tom Eliot. 
Father's some kind of a construction tycoon — and not quite aboveboard, 
either, so my cousins in St Lou tell me. 


Not that Henry will give you the slightest clue what his dad does. 
Acts like he doesn't know and certainly doesn't care. 
"Have you been to his house?’ 


‘Are you kidding? He's so secretive, you'd think it was the Manhattan Project 
or something. But I met his mother one time. 


Kind of by accident. She stopped in Hampden to see him on her way to New 
York and I bumped into her wandering around downstairs in Monmouth 
asking people if they knew where his room was.' 


"What was she like?’ 


‘Pretty lady. Dark hair and blue eyes like Henry, mink coat, too much lipstick 
and stuff if you ask me. Awfully young. Henry's her only chick and she adores 
him.' He leaned forward and lowered his voice. 'Family's got money like you 
wouldn't believe. Millions and millions. Course it's about as new as it comes, 


but a buck's a buck, know what I mean?' He winked. 'By the way. 
Meant to ask. How does your pop earn his filthy lucre?’ 
‘Oil,’ I said. It was partly true. 
Bunny's mouth fell open in a little round o. 'You have oil wells?’ 
"Well, we have one,' I said modestly. 
‘But it's a good one?’ 
‘So they tell me.' 
‘Boy,’ said Bunny, shaking his head. "The Golden West.' 
‘It's been good to us,' I said. 
‘Geez.’ Bunny said. 'My dad's just a lousy old bank president.’ 


I felt it necessary to change the subject, however awkwardly, as we were 
heading here towards treacherous waters. 'If Henry's from St Louis,’ I said, 
‘how did he get to be so smart?’ 


This was an innocuous question but, unexpectedly, Bunny winced. 'Henry 
had a bad accident when he was a little boy,' he said. 'Got hit by a car or 
something and nearly died. He was out of school for a couple years, had tutors 
and stuff, but for a long time he couldn't do much but lie in bed and read. I 
guess he was one of those kids who can read at college level when they're 
about two years old.' 


‘Hit by a car?’ 


'I think that's what it was. Can't think what else it could've been. He doesn't 
like to talk about it.’ He lowered his voice. 


"Know the way he parts his hair, so it falls over the right eye? 


That's because there's a scar there. Almost lost the eye, can't see out of it too 
good. And the stiff way he walks, sort of a limp. Not that it matters, he's 
strong as an ox. I don't know what he did, lift weights or what, but he 
certainly built himself back up again. A regular Teddy Roosevelt, overcoming 
obstacles and all. You got to admire him for it.’ He brushed his hair back 
again and motioned to the waiter for another drink. 'I mean, you take 
somebody like Francis. You ask me, he's as smart as Henry. Society boy, tons 
of money. He's had it too easy, though. He's lazy. Likes to play. 


Won't do a thing after school but drink like a fish and go to parties. 


Now Henry.’ He raised an eyebrow. 'Couldn't beat him away from Greek 
with a stick — Ah, thank you, there, sir,’ he said to the waiter, who was holding 
out another of the coral-colored drinks at arm's length. "You want another?’ 


Tm fine.’ 
'Go ahead, old man. On me.’ 


‘Another martini, I guess,' I said to the waiter, who had already turned away. 
He turned to glare at me. 


Thanks,’ I said weakly, looking away from his lingering, hateful smile until I 
was sure he had gone. 


"You know, there's nothing I hate like I hate an officious fag,’ said Bunny 
pleasantly. 'You ask me, I think they ought to round them all up and burn 
them at the stake.' 


I've known men who run down homosexuality because they are 
uncomfortable with it, perhaps harbor inclinations in that area; and I've known 
men who run down homosexuality and mean it. At first I had placed Bunny in 
the first category. His glad-handing, varsity chumminess was totally alien and 
therefore suspect; then, too, he studied the classics, which are certainly 
harmless enough but which still provoke the raised eyebrow in some circles. 
(‘You wrant to know what Classics are?’ said a drunk Dean of Admissions to 
me at a faculty party a couple of years ago. Till tell you what Classics are. 
Wars and homos.' A sententious and vulgar statement, certainly, but like many 
such gnomic vulgarities, it also contains a tiny splinter of truth.) 


The more I listened to Bunny, however, the more apparent it became that 
there was no affected laughter, no anxiety to please. 


Instead, there was the blithe unselfconciousness of some crotchety old 
Veteran of Foreign Wars — married for years, father of multitudes — who finds 
the topic infinitely repugnant and amusing. 


‘But your friend Francis?' I said. 


I was being snide, I suppose, or maybe I just wanted to see how he would 
wriggle out of that one. Though Francis might or might not have been 
homosexual — and could just as easily have been a really dangerous type of 
ladies' man — he was certainly of that vulpine, well-dressed, unflappable sort 
who, to someone with Bunny's alleged nose for such things, would rouse a 
certain suspicion. 


Bunny raised an eyebrow. ‘That's nonsense,’ he said curtly. 
"Who told you that?’ 


"Nobody. Just Judy Poovey,’ I said, when I saw he wasn't going to take 
nobody for an answer. 


"Well, I can see why she'd say it but nowadays everybody's gay this and gay 
that. There's still such a thing as an old-fashioned mama's boy. All Francis 
needs is a girlfriend.’ He squinted at me through the tiny, crazed glasses. 'And 
what about you?' he said, a trifle belligerently. 


"What?’ 


"You a single man? Got some little cheerleader waiting back home for you at 
Hollywood High?' 


"Well, no,' I said. I didn't feel like explaining my own girlfriend problems, 
not to him. It was only quite recently that I had managed to extricate myself 
from a long, claustrophobic relationship with a girl in California whom we 
will call Kathy. I met her my first year of college, and was initially attracted to 
her because she seemed an intelligent, brooding malcontent like myself; but 
after about a month, during which time she'd firmly glued herself to me, I 
began to realize, with some little horror, that she was nothing more than a 
lowbrow, pop-psychology version of Sylvia Plath. It lasted forever, like some 
weepy and endless made-for-TV movie — all the clinging, all the complaints, 
all the parking-lot confessions of ‘inadequacy’ and ‘poor self-image,’ all those 
banal sorrows. She was one of the main reasons I was in such an agony to 
leave home; she was also one of the reasons I was so wary of the bright, 
apparently innocuous flock of new girls I had met my first weeks of school. 


The thought of her had turned me somber. Bunny leaned across the table. 
‘Is it true,’ he said, 'that the gals are prettier in California?’ 


I started laughing, so hard I thought my drink was going to blow out my 
nose. 


‘Bathing beauties?’ He winked. 'Beach Blanket Bingo?’ 
"You bet.’ 


He was pleased. Like some jolly old dog of an uncle, he leaned across the 
table even further and began to tell me about his own girlfriend, whose name 
was Marion. 'I know you've seen her,' he said. ‘Just a little thing. Blond, blue- 
eyed, about so high?’ 


Actually, this rang a bell. I had seen Bunny in the post office, in the first 
week of school, talking rather officiously to a girl of this description. 


"Yep,' said Bunny proudly, running his finger along the edge of his glass. 
‘She's my gal. Keeps me in line, I can tell you,’ This time, caught in mid- 
swallow, I laughed so hard I was close to choking. 


‘And she's an elementaryeducation major, too, don't you love it?’ he said. 'I 
mean, she's a real girl.’ He drew his hands apart, as if to indicate a sizable 
space between them. 'Long hair, got a little meat on her bones, isn't afraid to 
wear a dress. I like that. Call me old-fashioned, but I don't care much for the 
brainy ones. 


Take Camilla. She's fun, and a good guy and all ' 
‘Come on,' I said, still laughing. 'She's really pretty.’ 


‘That she is, that she is,’ he agreed, holding up a conciliatory palm. 'Lovely 
girl. I've always said so. Looks just like a statue of Diana in my father's club. 
All she lacks is a mother's firm hand, but still, for my money, she's what you 
call a bramble rose, as opposed to your hybrid tea. Doesn't take the pains she 
ought, you know. And runs around half the time in her brother's sloppy old 
clothes, which maybe some girls could get away with — well, frankly I don't 
think any girls can really get away with it, but she certainly can't. Looks too 
much like her brother. I mean to say, Charles is a handsome fellow and a 
sterling character all around, but I wouldn't want to marry him, would I?' 


He was on a roll and was about to say something else; but then, quite 
suddenly, he stopped, his face souring as if something unpleasant had 
occurred to him. I was puzzled, yet a little amused; was he afraid he'd said too 
much, afraid of seeming foolish? I was trying to think of a quick change of 
subject, to let him off the hook, but then he shifted in his chair and squinted 
across the room. 


‘Look there,’ he said. 'Think that's us? It's about time.’ 


Despite the vast amount we ate that afternoon — soups, lobsters, pates, 
mousses, an array appalling in variety and amount — we drank even more, 
three bottles of Taittinger on top of the cocktails, and brandy on top of that, so 
that, gradually, our table became the sole hub of convergence in the room, 
around which objects spun and blurred at a dizzying velocity. I kept drinking 
from glasses which kept appearing as if by magic, Bunny proposing toasts to 
everything from Hampden College to Benjamin Jowett to Periclean Athens, 
and the toasts becoming purpler and purpler as time wore on until, by the time 
the coffee arrived, it was getting dark. Bunny was so drunk by then he asked 
the waiter to bring us two cigars, which he did, along with the check, face 


down, on a little tray. 


The dim room was whirling at what was now an incredible rate of speed, and 
the cigar, so far from helping that, made me see as well a series of luminous 
spots that were dark around the edges, and reminded me unpleasantly of those 
horrible one-celled creatures that I used to have to blink at through a 
microscope till my head swam. I put it out in the ashtray, or what I thought 
was the ashtray but was in fact my dessert plate. Bunny took off his gold- 
rimmed spectacles, unhooking them carefully from behind each ear, and 
began to polish them with a napkin. Without them, his eyes were small and 
weak and amiable, watery with smoke, crinkled at the edges with laughter. 


‘Ah. That was some lunch, wasn't it, old man?’ he said around the cigar 
clamped in his teeth, holding the glasses to the light to inspect them for dust. 
He looked like a very young Teddy Roosevelt, sans moustache, about to lead 
the Rough Riders up San Juan Hill or go out and track a wildebeest or 
something. 


‘It was wonderful. Thanks.’ 
He blew out a ponderous cloud of blue, foul-smelling smoke. 


‘Great food, good company, lotsa drinks, couldn't ask for much more, could 
we? What's that song?’ 


"What song?’ 


* want my dinner,’ sang Bunny, ‘and conversation, and... something, dum- 
te-dum.' 


"Don't know. ' 
'I don't know, either. Ethel Merman sings it.' 


The light was growing dimmer and, as I struggled to focus on objects outside 
our immediate area, I saw the place was empty except for us. In a distant 
corner hovered a pale shape which I believed to be our waiter, a being 
obscure, faintly supernatural in aspect, yet without that preoccupied air which 
shadows are said to possess: we were the sole focus of its attention; I felt it 
concentrating towards us its rays of spectral hate. 


'Uh,' I said, shifting in my chair with a movement that almost made me lose 
my balance, 'maybe we should go." 


Bunny waved his hand magnanimously and turned over the check, 
rummaging in a pocket as he studied it. In a moment he looked up and smiled. 


'I say, old horse.’ 
"Yes?' 
‘Hate to do this to you, but why don't you stand me lunch this time. 
I raised a drunken eyebrow and laughed. 'I don't have a cent on me.’ 
"Neither do I, he said. 'Funny thing. Seem to have left my wallet at home." 
‘Oh, come on. You're joking.’ 


‘Not at all,’ he said lightly. 'Haven't a dime. I'd turn out my pockets for you, 
but Twinkletoes'd see.’ 


I became aware of our malevolent waiter, lurking in the shadows, no doubt 
listening to this exchange with interest. 'How much is it?’ I said. 


He ran an unsteady finger down the column of figures. 'Comes to two 
hundred and eighty-seven dollars and fifty-nine cents,’ he said. 'That's without 


tip.’ 
I was stunned at this amount, and baffled at his lack of concern. 
‘That's a lot.’ 
"All that booze, you know.’ 
"What are we going to do?’ 
‘Can't you write a check or something?’ he said casually. 
'I don't have any checks.’ 
Then put it on your card. 
'I don't have a card.’ 
‘Oh, come on.’ 
T don't,’ I said, growing more irritated by the second. 


Bunny pushed back his chair and stood up and looked around the restaurant 
with a studied carelessness, like a detective cruising a hotel lobby, and for one 
wild moment I thought he was going to make a dash for it. Then he clapped 
me on the shoulder. 'Sit tight, old man,' he whispered. 'I'm going to make a 
phone call.’ 


And then he was off, his fists in his pockets, the white of his socks flashing in 
the dim. 


He was gone a long time. I was wondering if he was going to come back at 
all, if he hadn't just crawled out a window and left me to foot the bill, when 
finally a door shut somewhere and he sauntered back across the room. 


"Worry not, worry not,' he said as he slid into his chair. 'All's well.’ 
"What'd you do?’ 

‘Called Henry.’ 

"He's coming?’ 

In two shakes.’ 

‘Is he mad?’ 


'Naw,' said Bunny, brushing off this thought with a slight flick of the hand. 
‘Happy to do it. Between you and me, I think he's damned glad to get out of 
the house. 


After maybe ten extremely uncomfortable minutes, during which we 
pretended to sip at the dregs of our ice-cold coffee, Henry walked in, a book 
beneath his arm. 


‘See?’ whispered Bunny. 'Knew he'd come. Oh, hello,’ he said, as Henry 
approached the table. 'Boy am I glad to see ' 


"Where's the check,’ said Henry, in a toneless and deadly voice. 


"Here you are, old pal,’ said Bunny, fumbling among the cups and glasses. 
"Thanks a million. I really owe you ' 


Hello,’ said Henry coldly, turning to me. 
‘Hello.’ 

"How are you?’ He was like a robot. 
‘Fine.’ 

That's good.' 


"Here you go, old top,’ said Bunny, producing the check. 


Henry looked hard at the total, his face motionless. 


Well,’ said Bunny chummily, his voice booming in the tense silence, ‘I'd 
apologize for dragging you away from your book if you hadn't brought it with 
you. What you got there? Any good?’ 


Without a word, Henry handed it to him. The lettering on the front was in 
some Oriental language. Bunny stared at it for a moment, then gave it back. 
"That's nice,’ he said faintly. 


"Are you ready to go?' Henry said abruptly. 


‘Sure, sure,’ said Bunny hastily, leaping up and nearly knocking over the 
table. ‘Say the word. Undele, undele. Any time you want.' 


Henry paid the check while Bunny hung behind him like a bad child. The 
ride home was excruciating. Bunny, in the back seat, kept up a sally of 
brilliant but doomed attempts at conversation, which one by one flared and 
sank, while Henry kept his eyes on the road and I sat in the front beside him, 
fidgeting with the built-in ashtray, snapping it in and out till finally I realized 
how irritating this was and forced myself, with difficulty, to stop. 


He stopped at Bunny's first. Bellowing a chain of incoherent pleasantries, 
Bunny slapped me on the shoulder and leapt out of the car. 'Yes, well, Henry, 
Richard, here we are. Lovely. Fine. 


Thank you so much — beautiful lunch — well, toodle-oo, yes, yes, goodbye —' 
The door slammed and he shot up the walk at a rapid clip. 


Once he was inside, Henry turned to me. 'I'm very sorry,’ he said. 
‘Oh, no, please,’ I said, embarrassed. 'Just a mix-up. I'll pay you back.’ 


He ran a hand through his hair and I was surprised to see it was trembling. 'I 
wouldn't dream of such a thing,’ he said curtly. 


‘It's his fault.’ 

‘But ' 

‘He told you he was taking you out. Didn't he?' 

His voice had a slightly accusatory note. 'Well, yes,’ I said. 
‘And just happened to leave his wallet at home." 


‘It's all right.’ 


It's not all right,’ Henry snapped. ‘It's a terrible trick. How were you to 
know? He takes it on faith that whoever he's with can produce tremendous 
sums at a moment's notice. He never thinks about these things, you know, 
how awkward it is for everyone. Besides, what if I hadn't been at home?’ 


Tm sure he really just forgot.’ 
"You took a taxi there,’ said Henry shortly. "Who paid for that?’ 


Automatically I started to protest, and then stopped cold. Bunny had paid for 
the taxi. He'd even made sort of a big deal of it. 


"You see,’ said Henry. 'He's not even very clever about it, is he? It's bad 
enough he does it to anyone but I must say I never thought he'd have the nerve 
to try it on a perfect stranger. 


I didn't know what to say. We drove to the front of Monmouth in silence. 
"Here you are,’ he said. 'I'm sorry. 

It's fine, really. Thank you, Henry.’ 

‘Good night, then.’ 

I stood under the porch light and watched him drive away. 


Then I went inside and up to my room, where I collapsed on my bed in a 
drunken stupor. 


"We heard all about your lunch with Bunny,’ said Charles. 


I laughed. It was late the next afternoon, a Sunday, and I'd been at my desk 
nearly all day reading the Parmenides. The Greek was rough going but I had a 
hangover, too, and I'd been at it so long that the letters didn't even look like 
letters but something else, indecipherable, bird footprints on sand. I was 
staring out the window in a sort of trance, at the meadow cropped close like 
bright green velvet and billowing into carpeted hills at the horizon, when I 
saw the twins, far below, gliding like a pair of ghosts on the lawn. 


I leaned out the window and called to them. They stopped and turned, hands 
shading brows, eyes screwed up against the evening glare. ‘Hello,’ they called, 
and their voices, faint and ragged, were almost one voice floating up to me. 
‘Come down.’ 


So now we were walking in the grove behind the college, down by the 
scrubby little pine forest at the base of the mountains, with one of them on 
either side of me. 


They looked particularly angelic, their blond hair windblown, both in white 
tennis sweaters and tennis shoes. I wasn't sure why they'd asked me down. 
Though polite enough, they seemed wary and slightly puzzled, as if I were 
from some country with unfamiliar, eccentric customs, which made it 
necessary for them to take great caution in order not to startle or offend. 


"How'd you hear about it?’ I said. "The lunch?’ 

‘Bun called this morning. And Henry told us about it last night.’ 
'I think he was pretty mad.' 

Charles shrugged. 'Mad at Bunny, maybe. Not at you.’ 

"They don't care for each other, do they?’ 

They seemed astonished to hear this. 

‘They're old friends,’ said Camilla. 


‘Best friends, I would say,' said Charles. 'At one time you never saw them 
apart.’ 


"They seem to argue quite a bit.’ 


"Well, of course,’ said Camilla, 'but that doesn't mean they're not fond of each 
other all the same. Henry's so serious and Bun's so sort of — well, not serious — 
that they really get along quite well.' 


"Yes,' said Charles. 'L'Allegro and II Penseroso. A well-matched pair. I think 
Bunny's about the only person in the world who can make Henry laugh.’ He 
stopped suddenly and pointed into the distance. 'Have you ever been down 
there?’ he said. "There's a graveyard on that hill.’ j I could see it, just barely, 
through the pines — a flat, straggled line of tombstones, rickety and carious, 
skewed at such angles that they gave a hectic, uncanny effect of motion, as if 
some j hysterical force, a poltergeist perhaps, had scattered them only 
moments before. 


It's old,’ said Camilla. 'From the i,'00s. There was a town there too, a church 
and a mill. Nothing left but foundations, but you can still see the gardens they 
planted. Pippin apples and wintersweet, moss roses growing where the houses 
were. God knows what happened up there. An epidemic, maybe. Or a fire. 


‘Or the Mohawks,’ said Charles. "You'll have to go see it sometime. The 
cemetery especially. 


It's pretty. Especially in the snow.’ 


The sun was low, burning gold through the trees, casting our shadows before 
us on the ground, long and distorted. We walked for a long time without 
saying anything. The air was musty with far-off bonfires, sharp with the edge 
of a twilight chill. There was no noise but the crunch of our shoes on the 
gravel path, the whistle of wind in the pines; I was sleepy and my head hurt 
and there was something not quite real about any of it, something like a 
dream. I felt that at any moment I might start, my head on a pile of books at 
my desk, and find myself in a darkening room, alone. 


Suddenly Camilla stopped and put a finger to her lips. In a dead tree, split in 
two by lightning, were perched three huge, black birds, too big for crows. I 
had never seen anything like them before. 


'Ravens,' said Charles. 


We stood stock-still, watching them. One of them hopped clumsily to the 
end of a branch, which squeaked and bobbed under its weight and sent it 
squawking into the air. The other two followed, with a battery of flaps. They 
sailed over the meadow in a triangle formation, three dark shadows on the 
grass. 


Charles laughed. "Three of them for three of us. That's an augury, I bet.’ 
"An omen.’ 

‘Of what?' I said. 

"Don't know,’ said Charles. 'Henry's the ornithomantist. The bird-diviner.' 
"He's such an old Roman. He'd know.’ 


We had turned towards home and, at the top of a rise, I saw the gables of 
Monmouth House, bleak in the distance. The sky was cold and empty. A 
sliver of moon, like the white crescent of a thumbnail, floated in the dim. I 
was unused to those dreary autumn twilights, to chill and early dark; the 
nights fell too quickly and the hush that settled on the meadow in the evening 
filled me with a strange, tremulous sadness. Gloomily, I thought of Monmouth 
House: empty corridors, old gas-jets, the key turning in the lock of my room. 


"Well, see you later,’ Charles said, at the front door of Monmouth, his face 
pale in the glow of the porch lamp. 


Off in the distance, I saw the lights in the dining hall, across Commons; 
could see dark silhouettes moving past the windows. 


‘It was fun,' I said, digging my hands in my pockets. 'Want to come have 


dinner with me?’ 
‘Afraid not. We ought to be getting home.’ 
‘Oh, well,’ I said, disappointed but relieved. 'Some other time. 
"Well, you know...?' said Camilla, turning to Charles. 
He furrowed his eyebrows. 'Hmnn,' he said. "You're right.' 


‘Come have dinner at our house,’ said Camilla, turning impulsively back to 
me. 


‘Oh, no,' I said quickly. 
Please. 
"No, but thanks. It's all right, really.’ 


‘Oh, come on,' said Charles graciously. 'We're not having anything very good 
but we'd like you to come,' I felt a rush of gratitude towards him. I did want to 
go, rather a lot. 'If you're sure it's no trouble,' I said. 


‘No trouble at all,’ said Camilla. "Let's go.’ 


Charles and Camilla rented a furnished apartment on the third floor of a 
house in North Hampden. Stepping inside, one found oneself in a small living 
room with slanted walls and dormer windows. The armchairs and the lumpy 
sofa were upholstered in dusty brocades, threadbare at the arms: rose patterns 
on tan, acorns and oak leaves on mossy green. Everywhere were tattered 
doilies, dark with age. On the mantel of the fireplace (which I later discovered 
was inoperable) glittered a pair of lead-glass candelabra and a few pieces of 
tarnished silver plate. 


Though not untidy, exactly, it verged on being so. Books were stacked on 
every available surface; the tables were cluttered with papers, ashtrays, bottles 
of whiskey, boxes of chocolates; umbrellas and galoshes made passage 
difficult in the narrow hall. 


In Charles's room clothes were scattered on the rug and a rich confusion of 
ties hung from the door of the wardrobe; Camilla's night table was littered 
with empty teacups, leaky pens, dead marigolds in a water glass, and on the 
foot of her bed was laid a half-played game of solitaire. The layout of the 
place was peculiar, with unexpected windows and halls that led nowhere and 
low doors I had to duck to get through, and everywhere I looked was some 
fresh oddity: an old stereopticon (the palmy avenues of a ghostly Nice, 


receding in the sepia distance); arrowheads in a dusty glass case; a staghorn 
fern; a bird's skeleton. 


Charles went into the kitchen and began to open and shut cabinets Camilla 
made me a drink from a bottle of Irish whiskey which stood on top of a pile of 
National Geographies. 


"Have you been to the La Brea tar pits?’ she said, matter-offactly. 
'No,' Helplessly perplexed, I gazed at my drink. 


‘Imagine that. Charles,’ she said, into the kitchen, ‘he lives in California and 
he's never been to the La Brea tar pits.’ 


Charles emerged in the doorway, wiping his hands on a dishtowel. ‘Really?’ 
he said, with childlike astonishment. 'Why not?’ 


'I don't know.’ 

‘But they're so interesting. Really, just think of it.’ 

"Do you know many people here from California?’ said Camilla. 
'No.' 

"You know Judy Poovey.’ 

I was startled: how did she know that? 'She's not my friend,’ I said. 
"Nor mine,’ she said. 'Last year she threw a drink in my face.’ 

'I heard about that,' I said, laughing, but she didn't smile. 


‘Don't believe everything you hear, she said, and took another sip of her 
drink. 'Do you know who Cloke Rayburn is?’ 


I knew of him. There was a tight, fashionable clique of Californians at 
Hampden, mostly from San Francisco and L. A.; Cloke Rayburn was at its 
center, all bored smiles and sleepy eyes and cigarettes. The girls from Los 
Angeles, Judy Poovey included, were fanatically devoted to him. He was the 
sort you saw in the men's room at parties, doing coke on the edge of the sink. 


"He's a friend of Bunny's. 
"How's that?' I said, surprised. 


"They were at prep school together. At Saint Jerome's in Pennsylvania.' 


"You know Hampden,’ said Charles, taking a large gulp of his 7i drink. 
'These progressive schools, they love the problem student, the underdog. 
Cloke came in from some college in Colorado after his first year. He went 
skiing every day and failed every class. Hampden's the last place on earth ' 


‘For the worst people in the world,’ said Camilla, laughing. 
‘Oh, come on now,’ I said. 


"Well, in a way, I think it's true,’ said Charles. 'Half the people here are here 
because nowhere else would let them in. Not that Hampden's not a wonderful 
school. Maybe that's why it's wonderful. Take Henry, for instance. If 
Hampden hadn't let him in, he probably wouldn't have been able to go to 
college at all.’ 


'I can't believe that,' I said. 


"Well, it does sound absurd, but he never went past tenth grade in high school 
and, 1 mean, how many decent colleges are likely to take a tenth-grade 
dropout? Then there's the business of standardized tests. Henry refused to take 
the SATs — he'd probably score off the charts if he did, but he's got some kind 
of aesthetic objection to them. You can imagine how that looks to an 
admissions board.' He took another sip of his drink. 'So, how did you end up 
here?’ 


The expression in his eyes was hard to read. 'I liked the catalogue,’ I said. 


‘And to the admissions board I'm sure that seemed a perfectly sensible reason 
for letting you in." 


I wished I had a glass of water. The room was hot and my throat was dry and 
the whiskey had left a terrible taste in my mouth, not that it was bad whiskey; 
it was actually quite good, but I had a hangover and I hadn't eaten all day, and 
I felt, all at once, very nauseous. 


There was a knock at the door and then a flurry of knocks. 


Without a word, Charles drained his drink and ducked back into the kitchen 
while Camilla went to answer it. 


Before it was even open all the way I could see the glint of little round 
glasses. There was a chorus of hellos, and there they 72. all were: Henry; 
Bunny, with a brown paper bag from the supermarket; Francis, majestic in his 
long black coat, clutching, with a black-gloved hand, the neck of a bottle of 
champagne. 


The last inside, he leaned to kiss Camilla — not on the cheek, but on the 
mouth, with a loud and satisfied smack. ‘Hello, dear,’ he said. 'What a happy 
mistake we have made. I've got champagne, and Bunny brought stout, so we 
can make black and tans. What have we got to eat tonight?’ 


I stood up. 


For a fraction of a second they were struck silent. Then Bunny shoved his 
paper bag at Henry and stepped forward to shake my hand. 'Well, well. If it 
isn't my partner in crime,’ he said. 'Haven't had enough of going out to dinner, 
eh?' 


He slapped me on the back and started to babble. I felt hot, and rather sick. 
My eyes wandered around the room. Francis was talking to Camilla. Henry, 
by the door, gave me a small nod and a smile, nearly imperceptible. 


‘Excuse me,’ I said to Bunny. Till be back in just a minute. 


I found my way to the kitchen. It was like a kitchen in an old person's house, 
with shabby red linoleum and — in keeping with this odd apartment — a door 
that led onto the roof. I filled a glass from the tap and bolted it, a case of too 
much, too quickly. 


Charles had the oven open and was poking at some lamb chops with a fork. 


I — due largely to a rather harrowing tour my sixth-grade class took through a 
meat-packing plant — have never been much of a meat eater; the smell of lamb 
I would not have found appealing in the best of circumstances, but it was 
particularly repulsive in my current state. The door to the roof was propped 
open with a kitchen chair, a draft blowing through the rusty screen. I filled my 
glass again and went to stand by the door: deep breaths, I thought, fresh air, 
that's the ticket... Charles burned his finger, cursed, and slammed the oven 
shut. When he turned around he seemed surprised to find me. 


‘Oh, hi,' he said. 'What is it? Can I get you another drink?’ 
'No, thanks.’ 


He peered at my glass. 'What've you got? Is that gin? Where did you dig that 
up?’ 


Henry appeared in the door. 'Do you have an aspirin?’ he said to Charles. 
‘Over there. Have a drink, why don't you. 


Henry shook a few aspirins into his hand, along with a couple of mystery 


pills from his pocket, and washed them down with the glass of whiskey 
Charles gave him. 


He had left the aspirin bottle on the counter and surreptitiously I went over 
and got a couple for myself, but Henry saw me do it. 'Are you ill?’ he said, not 
unkindly. 


"No, just a headache,’ 1 said. 
"You don't have them often, I hope?’ 
"What? said Charles. 'Is everybody sick?’ 


"Why is everybody in here?' Bunny's pained voice came booming from the 
hallway. 'When do we eat?’ 


‘Hold on, Bun, it'll only be a minute. 


He sauntered in, peering over Charles's shoulder at the tray of chops he'd just 
removed from the broiler. 'Looks done to me,’ he said, and he reached over 
and picked up a tiny chop by the bone end and began to gnaw on it. 


‘Bunny, don't, really,’ said Charles. "There won't be enough to go around.’ 
Tm starving,’ said Bunny with his mouth full. "Weak from hunger.’ 
"Maybe we can save the bones for you to chew on,’ Henry said rudely. 
‘Oh, shut up. 

‘Really, Bun, I wish you would wait just a minute,’ said Charles. 


‘Okay,’ Bunny said, but he reached over and stole another chop when 
Charles's back was turned. A thin trickle of pinkish juice trickled down his 
hand and disappeared into the cuff of his sleeve. 


To say that the dinner went badly would be an exaggeration, but it didn't go 
all that well, either. Though I didn't do anything stupid, exactly, or say 
anything that I shouldn't, I felt dejected and bilious, and I talked little and ate 
even less. Much of the talk centered around events to which I was not privy, 
and even Charles's kind parenthetical remarks of explanation did not help 
much to clarify it. Henry and Francis argued interminably about how far apart 
the soldiers in a Roman legion had stood: shoulder to shoulder (as Francis 
said) or (as Henry maintained) three or four feet apart. This led into an even 
longer argument — hard to follow and, to me, intensely boring — about whether 
Hesiod's primordial Chaos was simply empty space or chaos in the modern 
sense of the word. 


Camilla put on ajosephine Baker record; Bunny ate my lamb chop. 


I left early. Both Francis and Henry offered to drive me home, which for 
some reason made me feel even worse. I told them I'd rather walk, thanks, and 
backed out of the apartment, smiling, practically delirious, my face burning 
under the collective gaze of cool, curious solicitude. 


It wasn't far to school, only fifteen minutes, but it was getting cold and my 
head hurt and the whole evening had left me with a keen sense of inadequacy 
and failure which grew keener with every step. I moved relentlessly over the 
evening, back and forth, straining to remember exact words, telling 
inflections, any subtle insults or kindnesses I might've missed, and my mind — 
quite willingly — supplied various distortions. 


When I got to my room it was silver and alien with moonlight, the window 
still open and the Parmenides open on the desk where I had left it; a half- 
drunk coffee from the snack bar stood beside it, cold in its styrofoam cup. The 
room was chilly but I didn't shut the window. Instead, I lay down on my bed, 
without taking off my shoes, without turning on the light. 


As I lay on my side, staring at a pool of white moonlight on the wooden 
floor, a gust of wind blew the curtains out, long and pale as ghosts. As though 
an invisible hand were leafing through them, the pages of the Pannenides 
rippled back and forth. 


I had meant to sleep only a few hours, but I woke with a start the next 
morning to find sunlight pouring in and the clock reading five of nine. 
Without stopping to shave or comb my hair or even change my clothes from 
the night before, I grabbed my Greek Prose composition book and my Liddell 
and Scott and ran to Julian's office. 


Except for Julian, who always made a point of arriving a few minutes late, 
everyone was there. From the hall I heard them talking, but when I opened the 
door they all fell quiet and looked at me. 


No one said anything for a moment. Then Henry said: 'Good morning.’ 


‘Good morning,’ I said. In the clear northern light they all looked fresh, well 
rested, startled at my appearance; they stared at me as I ran a self-conscious 
hand through my disheveled hair. 


‘Looks like you didn't meet up with a razor this morning, chap,’ said Bunny 
to me. 'Looks like ' 


Then the door opened and Julian walked in. 


There was a great deal to do in class that day, especially for me, being so far 
behind; on Tuesdays and Thursdays it might be pleasant to sit around and talk 
about literature, or philosophy, but the rest of the week was taken up in Greek 
grammar and prose composition and that, for the most part, was brutal, 
bludgeoning labor, labor that I — being older now, and a little less hardy would 
scarcely be able to force myself to do today. I had certainly plenty to worry 
about besides the coldness which apparently had infected my classmates once 
again, their crisp air of solidarity, the cool way their eyes seemed to look right 
through me. There had been an opening in their ranks, but now it was closed; 
I was bark, it seemed, exactly where I'd begun. 


That afternoon, I went to see Julian on the pretext of talking about credit 
transfers, but with something very different on my mind. 


For it seemed, quite suddenly, that my decision to drop everything for Greek 
had been a rash and foolish one, and made for all the wrong reasons. What 
had I been thinking of? I liked Greek, and I liked Julian, but I wasn't sure if I 
liked his pupils or not and anyway, did I really want to spend my college 
career and subsequently my life looking at pictures of broken kouroi and 
poring over the Greek particles? Two years before, I had made a similar 
heedless decision which had plummeted me into a nightmarish, year-long 
round of chloroformed rabbits and day trips to the morgue, from which I had 
barely escaped at all. This was by no means as bad (with a shudder I 
remembered my old zoology lab, eight in the morning, the bobbing vats of 
fetal pigs), by no means —1 told myself- as bad as that. But still it seemed like 
a big mistake, and it was too late in the term to pickup my old classes or 
change counselors again. 


I suppose I'd gone to see Julian in order to revive my flagging assurance, in 
hopes he would make me feel as certain as I had that first day. And I am fairly 
sure he would have done just that if only I had made it in to see him. But as it 
happened, I didn't get to talk to him at all. Stepping onto the landing outside 
his office, I heard voices in the hall and stopped. 


It was Julian and Henry. Neither of them had heard me come up the stairs. 
Henry was leaving; Julian was standing in the open door. His brow was 
furrowed and he looked very somber, as if he were saying something of the 
gravest importance. Making the vain, or rather paranoid, assumption that they 
might be talking about me, I took a step closer and peered as far as I could 
risk around the corner. 


Julian finished speaking. He looked away for a moment, then bit his lower 
lip and looked up at Henry. 


Then Henry spoke. His words were low but deliberate and distinct. ‘Should I 


do what is necessary?’ 
To my surprise, Julian took both Henry's hands in his own. 
"You should only, ever, do what is necessary,’ he said. 


What, I thought, the hell is going on? I stood at the top of the stairs, trying 
not to make a sound, wanting to leave before they saw me but afraid to move. 


To my utter, utter surprise Henry leaned over and gave Julian a quick little 
businesslike kiss on the cheek. Then he turned to leave, but fortunately for me 
he looked over his shoulder to say one last thing; I crept down the stairs as 
quietly as I could, breaking into a run when I was at the second landing and 
out of earshot. 


The week that followed was a solitary and surreal one. The leaves were 
changing; it rained a good deal and got dark early; in Monmouth House 
people gathered around the downstairs fireplace, burning logs stolen by stealth 
of night from the faculty house, and drank warm cider in their stocking feet. 
But I went straight to my classes and straight back to Monmouth and up the 
stairs to my room, bypassing all these homey firelit scenes and hardly 
speaking to a soul, even to the chummier sorts who invited me down to join in 
all this communal dorm fun. 


I suppose I was only a little depressed, now the novelty of it had worn off, at 
the wildly alien character of the place in which I found myself: a strange land 
with strange customs and peoples and unpredictable weathers. I thought I was 
sick, though I don't believe I really was; I was just cold all the time and unable 
to sleep, sometimes no more than an hour or two a night. 


Nothing is lonelier or more disorienting than insomnia. I spent the nights 
reading Greek until four in the morning, until my eyes burned and my head 
swam, until the only light burning in Monmouth House was my own. When I 
could no longer concentrate on Greek and the alphabet began to transmute 
itself into incoherent triangles and pitchforks, I read The Great Gatsby. It is 
one of my favorite books and I had taken it out of the library in hopes that it 
would cheer me up; of course, it only made me feel worse, since in my own 
humorless state I failed to see anything except what I construed as certain 
tragic similarities between Gatsby and myself. 


Tm a survivor,’ the girl at the party was saying to me. She was blond and tan 
and too tall — almost my height — and without even asking I knew she was 
from California. I suppose it was something in her voice, something about the 
expanse of reddened, freckled skin, stretched taut over a bony clavicle and a 
bonier sternum and ribcage and entirely unrelieved by breasts of any sort — 
which presented itself to me through the lacuna of a Gaultier corselet. It was 


Gaultier, I knew, because she'd sort of casually let that slip. To my eyes it 
looked only like a wet suit, laced crudely up the front. 


She was shouting at me over the music. 'I guess I've had a pretty hard life, 
with my injury and all' (I had heard about this previously: loose tendons; 
dance world's loss; performance-art's gain) 'but I guess I just have a very 
strong sense of myself, of my own needs. Other people are important to me, 
sure, but I always get what I want from them, you know.’ Her voice was 
brusque with the staccato Californians sometimes affect when they're trying 
too hard to be from New York, but there was a bright hard edge of that 
Golden State cheeriness, too. A Cheerleader of the Damned. She was the kind 
of pretty, burnt-out, vacuous girl who at home wouldn't have given me the 
time of day. But now I realized she was trying to pick me up. I hadn't slept 
with anybody in Vermont except a little red-haired girl I met at a party on the 
first weekend. Somebody told me later she was a paper-mill heiress from the 
Midwest. Now I cut my eyes away whenever we met. (The gentleman's way 
out, as my classmates used to joke.) 


'Do you want a cigarette?’ I shouted at this one. 

'I don't smoke.’ 

'I don't, either, except at parties.’ 

She laughed. 'Well, sure, give me one,’ she yelled in my ear. 
"You don't know where we can find any pot, do you?’ 


While I was lighting the cigarette for her, someone elbowed me in the back 
and I lurched forward. The music was insanely loud and people were dancing 
and there was beer puddled on the floor and a rowdy mob at the bar. I couldn't 
see much but a Dantesque mass of bodies on the dance floor and a cloud of 
smoke hovering near the ceiling, but I could see, where light from the corridor 
spilled into the darkness, an upturned glass here, a wide lipsticked laughing 
mouth there. As parties go, this was a nasty one and getting worse — already 
certain of the freshmen had begun to throw up as they waited in dismal lines 
for the bathroom — but it was Friday and I'd spent all week reading and I didn't 
care. I knew none of my fellow Greek students would be there. Having been 
to every Friday night party since school began, I knew they avoided them like 
the Black Death. 


'Thanks,' said the girl. She had edged into a stairwell, where things were a 
little quieter. Now it was possible to talk without shouting but I'd had about 
six vodka tonics and I couldn't think of a thing to say to her, I couldn't even 
remember her name. 


"Uh, what's your major,’ I said drunkenly at last. 
She smiled. 'Performance art. You asked me that already.’ 
‘Sorry. I forgot.’ 


She looked at me critically. 'You ought to loosen up. Look at your hands. 
You're very tense.' 


"This is about as loose as I get,' I said, quite truthfully. 


She looked at me, and a light of recognition began to dawn in her eyes. 'I 
know who you are,’ she said, looking at my jacket and my tie that had the 
pictures of the men hunting deer on it. 


‘Judy told me all about you. You're the new guy who's studying Greek with 
those creepos.' 


‘Judy? Whar do you mean, Judy told you about me?’ 


She ignored this. 'You had better watch out,’ she said. 'I have heard some 
weird shit about those people.' 


"Like what?’ 

"Like they worship the flicking Devil.’ 

'The Greeks have no Devil,’ I said pedantically. 
"Well, that's not what I heard.' 

"Well, so what. You're wrong.’ 

‘That's not all. I've heard some other stuff, too.' 
"What else?’ 

She wouldn't say. 

"Who told you this? Judy?’ 

'No.' 

"Who, then?’ 

‘Seth Gartrell,' she said, as if that settled the matter. 


As it happened, I knew Gartrell. He was a bad painter and a vicious gossip, 


with a vocabulary composed almost entirely of obscenities, guttural verbs, and 
the word 'postmodernist.' 


‘That swine,’ I said. "You know him?’ 


She looked at me with a glitter of antagonism. ‘Seth Gartrell is my good 
friend.' 


I really had had a bit much to drink. 'Is he?' I said. 'Tell me, then. How does 
his girlfriend get all those black eyes? And does he really piss on his paintings 
like Jackson Pollock?’ 


‘Seth,’ she said coldly, 'is a genius.’ 
Is that so? Then he's certainly a master of deception, isn't he?’ 


"He is a wonderful painter. Conceptually, that is. Everybody in the art 
department says so.' 


"Well then. If everybody says it, it must be true,’ 'A lot of people don't like 
Seth.’ She was angry now. 'I think a lot of people are just jealous of him.’ 


A hand tugged at the back of my sleeve, near the elbow. I shrugged it off. 
With my luck it could only be Judy Poovey, trying to hit up on me as she 
inevitably did about this time every Friday night. But the tug came again, this 
time sharper and more impatient; irritably I turned, and almost stumbled 
backwards into the blonde. 


It was Camilla. Her iron-colored eyes were all I saw at first luminous, 
bemused, bright in the dim light from the bar. 'Hi,' she said. 


I stared at her. 'Helio,' I said, trying to be nonchalant but delighted and 
beaming down at her all the same. 'How are you? 


What are you doing here? Can I get you a drink?’ 
"Are you busy?’ she said. 


It was hard to think. The little gold hairs were curled in a very engaging way 
at her temples. 'No, no, I'm not busy at all,’ I said, looking not at her eyes but 
at this fascinating area around her forehead. 


Tf you are, just say so,' she said in an undertone, looking over my shoulder. 'I 
don't want to drag you away from anything.' 


Of course: Miss Gaul tier. I turned around, half-expecting some snide 
comment, but she'd lost interest and was talking pointedly to someone else. 


'No,' I said. 'I'm not doing a thing.’ 
‘Do you want to go to the country this weekend?’ 
"What?' 


"We're leaving now. Francis and me. He has a house about an hour from 
here. 


I was really drunk; otherwise I wouldn't have just nodded and followed her 
without a single question. To get to the door, we had to make our way through 
the dance floor: sweat and heat, blinking Christmas lights, a dreadful crush of 
bodies. When finally we stepped outside, it was like falling into a pool of 
cool, still water. Shrieks and depraved music throbbed, muffled, through the 
closed windows. 


"My God,' said Camilla. 'Those things are hellish. People being sick all over 
the place.’ 


The pebbled drive was silver in the moonlight. Francis was standing in the 
shadows under some trees. When he saw us coming he stepped suddenly onto 
the lighted path. 'Boo,' he said. 


We both jumped back. Francis smiled thinly, light glinting off his fraudulent 
pince-nez. Cigarette smoke curled from his nostrils. 


Hello,’ he said to me, then glanced at Camilla. 'I thought you'd run off,’ he 
said. 


"You should have come in with me.' 


Tm glad I didn't,’ said Francis, 'because I saw some interesting things out 
here,’ ‘Like what?’ 


"Like some security guards handing out a girl on a stretcher and a black dog 
attacking some hippies.’ He laughed, then tossed his car keys in the air and 
caught them with a jingle. 'Are you ready?’ 


He had a convertible, an old Mustang, and we drove all the way to the 
country with the top down and the three of us in the front seat. Amazingly, I 
had never been in a convertible before, and it is even more amazing that I 
managed to fall asleep when both momentum and nerves should've kept me 
awake but I did, fell asleep with my cheek resting on the padded leather of the 
door, my sleepless week and the six vodka tonics hitting me as hard as an 
injection. 


I remember little of the ride. Francis drove at a reasonable clip — he was a 
careful driver, unlike Henry, who drove fast and often recklessly and whose 
eyes were none too good besides. The night wind in my hair, their indistinct 
talk, the songs on the radio all mingled and blurred in my dreams. It seemed 
we'd been driving for only a few minutes when suddenly I was conscious of 
silence, and of Camilla's hand on my shoulder. 'Wake up,’ she said. 


"We're here.’ 


Dazed, half dreaming, not quite sure where I was, I shook my head and 
inched up in my seat. There was drool on my cheek and I wiped it off with the 
flat of my hand. 


"Arc you awake?’ 


"Yes,' I said, though I wasn't. It was dark and I couldn't see a thing. My 
fingers finally closed on the door handle and only then, as I was climbing out 
of the car, the moon came out from behind a cloud and I saw the house. It was 
tremendous. I saw, in sharp, ink-black silhouette against the sky, turrets and 
pikes, a widow's walk. 


'Geez,' I said. 


Francis was standing beside me, but I was scarcely aware of it till he spoke, 
and I was startled by the closeness of his voice. 'You can't get a very good 
idea of it at night,’ he said. 


'This belongs to you?’ I said. 


He laughed. 'No. It's my aunt's. Way too big for her, but she won't sell it. She 
and my cousins come in the summer, and only a caretaker the rest of the year.’ 


The entrance hall had a sweet, musty smell and was so dim it seemed almost 
gaslit; the walls were spidery with the shadows of potted palms and on the 
ceilings, so high they made my head reel, loomed distorted traces of our own 
shadows. Someone in the back of the house was playing the piano. 
Photographs and gloomy, gilt-framed portraits lined the hall in long 
perspectives. 


It smells terrible in here,’ said Francis. "Tomorrow, if it's warm, we'll air it 
out, Bunny gets asthma from all this dust... 


That's my great-grandmother,' he said, pointing at a photograph which he 
saw had caught my attention. ‘And that's her brother next to her — he went 
down on the Titanic, poor thing. They found his tennis racket floating around 
in the North Atlantic about three weeks afterward.' 


‘Come see the library,’ said Camilla. 


Francis close behind us, we went down the hall and through several rooms — 
a lemon-yellow sitting room with gilt mirrors and chandeliers, a dining room 
dark with mahogany, rooms I wanted to linger in but got only a glimpse of. 
The piano music got closer; it was Chopin, one of the preludes, maybe. 


Walking into the library, I took in my breath sharply and stopped: glass- 
fronted bookcases and Gothic panels, stretching fifteen feet to a frescoed and 
plaster-medallioned ceiling. In the back of the room was a marble fireplace, 
big as a sepulchre, and a globed gasolier — dripping with prisms and strings of 
crystal beading — sparkled in the dim. 


There was a piano, too, and Charles was playing, a glass of whiskey on the 
seat beside him. He was a little drunk; the Chopin was slurred and fluid, the 
notes melting sleepily into one another. 


A breeze stirred the heavy, moth-eaten velvet curtains, ruffling his hair. 
‘Golly,’ I said. 


The playing stopped abruptly and Charles looked up. 'Well there you are,’ he 
said. 'You're awfully late. Bunny's gone to sleep.’ 


"Where's Henry?’ said Francis. 
"Working. He might come down before bed.’ 
Camilla went to the piano and took a sip from Charles's glass. 


"You should have a look at these books,’ she said to me. 'There's a first 
edition oflvanhoe here.’ 


‘Actually, I think they sold that one,’ said Francis, sitting in a leather 
armchair and lighting a cigarette. "There are one or two interesting things but 
mostly it's Marie Corelli and old Rover Boys.’ 


I walked over to the shelves. Something called London by somebody called 
Pennant, six volumes bound in red leather massive books, two feet tall. Next 
to it The Club History of London, an equally massive set, bound in pale 
calfhide. The libretto of The Pirates of Penzance. Numberless Bobbsey Twins. 
Byron's Marino Faliero, bound in black leather, with the date 1821 stamped in 
gold on the spine. 


"Here, go make your own drink if you want one,’ Charles was saying to 
Camilla. 


'I don't want my own. I want some of yours." 


He gave her the glass with one hand and, with the other, wobbled up a 
difficult backwards-and-forwards scale. 


‘Play something,' I said. 

He rolled his eyes. 

‘Oh, come on,' said Camilla. 
'No.' 


‘Of course, he can't really play anything,’ Francis said in a sympathetic 
undertone. 


Charles took a swallow of his drink and ran up another octave, trilling 
nonsensically on the keys with his right hand. Then he handed the glass to 
Camilla and, left hand free, reached down and turned the fibrillation into the 
opening notes of a Scott Joplin rag. 


He played with relish, sleeves rolled up, smiling at his work, tinkling from 
the low ranges to the high with the tricky syncopation of a tap dancer going 
up a Ziegfeld staircase. Camilla, on the seat beside him, smiled at me. I smiled 
back, a little dazed. 


The ceilings had set off a ghostly echo, giving all that desperate hilarity the 
quality of a memory even as I sat listening to it, memories of things I'd never 
known. 


Charlestons on the wings of airborne biplanes. Parties on sinking ships, the 
icy water bubbling around the waists of the orchestra as they sawed out a last 
brave chorus of 'Auld Lang Syne.' Actually, it wasn't ‘Auld Lang Syne' they'd 
sung, the night the Titanic went down, but hymns. Lots of hymns, and the 
Catholic priest saying Hail Marys, and the first-class salon which had really 
looked a lot like this: dark wood, potted palms, rose silk lampshades with 
their swaying fringe. I really had had a bit much to drink. I was sitting 
sideways in my chair, holding tight to the arms (Holy Mary, Mother of God), 
and even the floors were listing, like the decks of a foundering ship; like we 
might all slide to the other end with a hysterical wheeee! piano and all. 


There were footsteps on the stair and Bunny, his eyes screwed up and his 
hair standing on end, tottered in wearing his pajamas. 


"What the hell,’ he said. "You woke me up.’ But nobody paid any attention to 
him. and finally he poured himself a drink and tottered back up the stairs with 


it, in his bare feet, to bed. 
The chronological sorting of memories is an interesting business. 


Prior to this first weekend in the country, my recollections of that fall are 
distant and blurry: from here on out, they come into a sharp, delightful focus. 
It is here that the stilted mannequins of my initial acquaintance begin to yawn 
and stretch and come to life. It was months before the gloss and mystery of 
newness, which kept me from seeing them with much objectivity, would wear 
entirely off — though their reality was far more interesting than any idealized 
version could possibly be — but it is here, in my memory, that they cease being 
totally foreign and begin to appear, for the first time, in shapes very like their 
bright old selves. 


I too appear as something of a stranger in these early memories: watchful 
and grudging, oddly silent. All my life, people have taken my shyness for 
sullenness, snobbery, bad temper of one sort or another. ‘Stop looking so 
superior!’ my father sometimes used to shout at me when I was eating, 
watching television, or otherwise minding my own business. But this facial 
cast of mine (that's what I think it is, really, a way my mouth has of turning 
down at the corners, it has little to do with my actual moods) has worked as 
often to my favor as to my disadvantage. 


Months after I got to know the five of them, I found to my surprise that at the 
start they'd been nearly as bewildered by me as I by them. It never occurred to 
me that my behavior could seem to them anything but awkward and 
provincial, certainly not that it would appear as enigmatic as it in fact did; 
why, they eventually asked me, hadn't I told anyone anything about myself? 


Why had I gone to such lengths to avoid them? (Startled, I realized my trick 
of ducking into doorways wasn't as clandestine as I'd thought.) And why 
hadn't I returned any of their invitations? 


Though I had believed they were snubbing me, now I realize they were only 
waiting, politely as maiden aunts, for me to make the next move. 


At any rate, this was the weekend that things started to change, that the dark 
gaps between the street lamps begin to grow smaller and smaller, and farther 
apart, the first sign that one's train is approaching familiar territory, and will 
soon be passing through the well-known, well-lighted streets of town. The 
house was their trump card, their fondest treasure, and that weekend they 
revealed it to me slyly, by degrees — the dizzy little turret rooms, the high- 
beamed attic, the old sleigh in the cellar, big enough to be pulled by four 
horses, astring with bells. The carriage barn was a caretaker's house. (‘That's 
Mrs Hatch in the yard. She's very sweet but her husband is a Seventh-Day 


Adventist or something, quite strict. We have to hide all the bottles when he 
comes inside.' 


‘Or what?’ 
‘Or he'll get depressed and start leaving little tracts all over the place.') 


In the afternoon we wandered down to the lake, which was shared, 
discreetly, by several adjoining properties. On the way they pointed out the 
tennis court and the old summerhouse, a mock tholos, Doric by way of 
Pompeii, and Stanford White, and (said Francis, who was scornful of this 
Victorian effort at classicism) D. W. Griffith and Cecil B. De Mille. It was 
made of plaster, he said, and had come in pieces from Sears, Roebuck. 


The grounds, in places, bore signs of the geometric Victorian trimness which 
had been their original form: drained fish-pools; the long white colonnades of 
skeleton pergolas; rock-bordered parterres where flowers no longer grew. But 
for the most part, these traces were obliterated, with the hedges running wild 
and native trees — slippery elm and tamarack — outnumbering the quince and 
Japanese maple. 


The lake, surrounded by birches, was bright and very still. 


Muddled in the rushes was a small wooden rowboat, painted white on the 
outside and blue within. 


‘Can we take it out?’ I said, intrigued. 
‘Of course. But we can't all go, we'll sink.’ 


I had never been in a boat in my life. Henry and Camilla went out with me — 
Henry at the oars, his sleeves rolled to the elbow and his dark jacket on the 
seat beside him. He had a habit, as I was later to discover, of trailing off into 
absorbed, didactic, entirely self-contained monologues, about whatever he 
happened to be interested in at the time — the Catuvellauni, or late Byzantine 
painting, or headhunting in the Solomon Islands. That day he was talking 
about Elizabeth and Leicester, I remember: the murdered wife, the royal 
barge, the queen on a white horse talking to the troops at Tilbury Fort, and 
Leicester and the Earl of Essex holding the bridle rein... The swish of the oars 
and the hypnotic thrum of dragonflies blended with his academic monotone. 
Camilla, flushed and sleepy, trailed her hand in the water. Yellow birch leaves 
blew from the trees and drifted down to rest on the surface. It was many years 
later, and far away, when I came across this passage in The Waste Land: 
Elizabeth and Leicester Beating oars The stern was formed A gilded shell Red 
and gold The brisk swell Rippled both shores Southwest wind Carried down 
stream The peal of bells White towers Weialala leia Wallala leilala We went 


to the other side of the lake and returned, half-blinded by the light on the 
water, to find Bunny and Charles on the front porch, eating ham sandwiches 
and playing cards. 


"Have some champagne, quick,’ Bunny said. ‘It's going flat.’ 
"Where is it?’ 
In the teapot.' 


"Mr Hatch would be beside himself if he saw a bottle on the porch,’ said 
Charles. 


They were playing Go Fish: it was the only card game that Bunny knew. 


On Sunday I woke early to a quiet house. Francis had given my clothes to 
Mrs Hatch to be laundered; putting on a bathrobe he'd lent me, I went 
downstairs to sit on the porch for a few minutes before the others woke up. 


Outside, it was cool and still, the sky that hazy shade of white peculiar to 
autumn mornings, and the wicker chairs were drenched with dew. The hedges 
and the acres and acres of lawn were covered in a network of spider web that 
caught the dew in beads so that it glistened white as frost. Preparing for their 
journey south, the martins flapped and fretted in the eaves, and, from the 
blanket of mist hovering over the lake, I heard the harsh, lonely cry of the 
mallards. 


‘Good morning,’ a cool voice behind me said. 


Startled, I turned to see Henry sitting at the other end of the porch. He was 
without a jacket but otherwise immaculate for such an ungodly hour: trousers 
knife-pressed, his white shirt crisp with starch. On the table in front of him 
were books and papers, a steaming espresso pot and a tiny cup, and — I was 
surprised to see — an unfiltered cigarette burning in an ashtray. 


"You're up early,’ I said. 

'I always rise early. The morning is the best time for me to work.’ 

I glanced at the books. "What are you doing, Greek?’ 

Henry set the cup back into its saucer. 'A translation of Paradise Lost.’ 
Into what language?’ 


‘Latin,’ he said solemnly. 


‘Hmm,’ 1 said. 'Why?' 


'I am interested to see what I will wind up with. Milton to my way of 
thinking is our greatest English poet, greater than Shakespeare, but I think in 
some ways it was unfortunate that he chose to write in English — of course, he 
wrote a not inconsiderable amount of poetry in Latin, but that was early, in his 
student days; what I'm referring to is the later work. In Paradise Lost he 
pushes English to its very limits but I think no language without noun cases 
could possibly support the structural order he attempts to impose.’ He laid his 
cigarette back in the ashtray. I stared at it burning. 'Will you have some 
coffee?’ 


"No, thank you.’ 
'I hope you slept well.’ 
"Yes, thanks.’ 


I sleep better out here than I usually do,’ said Henry, adjusting his glasses 
and bending back over the lexicon. There was a subtle evidence of fatigue, 
and strain, in the slope of his shoulders which I, a veteran of many sleepless 
nights, recognized immediately. 


Suddenly I realized that this unprofitable task of his was probably nothing 
more than a method of whiling away the early morning hours, much as other 
insomniacs do crossword puzzles. 


‘Are you always up this early?’ I asked him. 


‘Almost always,’ he said without looking up. ‘It's beautiful here, but morning 
light can make the most vulgar things tolerable.’ 


'I know what you mean,’ I said, and I did. About the only time of day I had 
been able to stand in Piano was the very early morning, almost dawn, when 
the streets were empty and the light was golden and kind on the dry grass, the 
chain-link fences, the solitary scrub-oaks. 


Henry looked up from his books at me. 'You're not very happy where you 
come from, are you?’ he said. 


I was startled at this Holmes-like deduction. He smiled at my evident 
discomfiture. 


‘Don't worry. You hide it very cleverly,’ he said, going back to his book. 
Then he looked up again. 'The others really don't understand that sort of thing, 
you know. ' 


He said this without malice, without empathy, without even much in the way 
of interest. I was not even sure what he meant, but, for the first time, I had a 
glimmer of something I had not previously understood: why the others were 
all so fond of him. 


Grown children (an oxymoron, I realize) veer instinctively to extremes; the 
young scholar is much more a pedant than his older counterpart. And I, being 
young myself, took these pronouncements of Henry's very seriously. I doubt if 
Milton himself could have impressed me more. 


I suppose there is a certain crucial interval in everyone's life when character 
is fixed forever; for me, it was that first fall term I spent at Hampden. So many 
things remain with me from that time, even now: those preferences in clothes 
and books and even food — acquired then, and largely, I must admit, in 
adolescent emulation of the rest of the Greek class — have stayed with me 
through the years. It is easy, even now, for me to remember what their daily 
routines, which subsequently became my own, were like. Regardless of 
circumstance they lived like clockwork, with surprisingly little of that chaos 
which to me had always seemed so inherent a part of college life — irregular 
diet and work habits, trips to the Laundromat at one a. m. There were certain 
times of the day or night, even when the world was falling in, when you could 
always find Henry in the all-night study room of the library, or when you 
knew it would be useless to even look for Bunny, because he was on his 
Wednesday date with Marion or his Sunday walk. (Rather in the way that the 
Roman I Empire continued in a certain fashion to run itself even when there 
was no one left to run it and the reason behind it was entirely gone, much of 
this routine remained intact even during the terrible days after Bunny's death. 
Up until the very end there was always, always, Sunday-night dinner at 
Charles and Camilla's, except on the evening of the murder itself, when no 
one felt much like eating and it was postponed until Monday.) 


I was surprised by how easily they managed to incorporate me into their 
cyclical, Byzantine existence. They were all so used to one another that I 
think they found me refreshing, and they were intrigued by even the most 
mundane of my habits: by my fondness for mystery novels and my chronic 
movie-going; by the fact that I used disposable razors from the supermarket 
and cut my own hair instead of going to the barber; even by the fact that I read 
papers and watched news on television from time to time (a habit which 
seemed to them an outrageous eccentricity, peculiar to me alone; none of 
them were the least bit interested in anything that went on in the world, and 
their ignorance of current events and even recent history was rather 
astounding. 


Once, over dinner, Henry was quite startled to learn from me that men had 
walked on the moon. 'No,' he said, putting down his fork. 


‘It's true,’ chorused the rest, who had somehow managed to pick this up along 
the way. 


'I don't believe it.' 
'I saw it,' said Bunny. 'It was on television. 
"How did they get there? When did this happen’). 


They were still overwhelming as a group, and it was on an individual basis 
that I really got to know them. Because he knew I kept late hours, too, Henry 
would sometimes stop by late at night, on his way home from the library. 
Francis, who was a terrible hypochondriac and refused to go to the doctor 
alone, frequently dragged me along and it was, oddly enough, during those 
drives to the allergist in Manchester or the ear-nose-and throat man in Keene 
that we became friends. That fall, he had to have a root canal, over about four 
or five weeks; each Wednesday afternoon he would show up, white-faced and 
silent, at my room, and we would go together to a bar in town and drink until 
his appointment, at three. The ostensible purpose of my coming was so I 
could drive him home when he got out, woozy with laughing gas, but as I 
waited for him at the bar while he went across the street to the dentist's office, 
I was generally in no better condition to drive than he was. 


I liked the twins most. They treated me in a happy, offhand manner which 
implied I'd known them much longer than I had. 


Camilla I was fondest of, but as much as I enjoyed her company I was 
slightly uneasy in her presence; not because of any lack of charm or kindness 
on her part, but because of a too-strong wish to impress her on mine. Though I 
looked forward to seeing her, and thought of her anxiously and often, I was 
more comfortable with Charles. He was a lot like his sister, impulsive and 
generous, but more moody; and though he sometimes had long gloomy spells, 
he was very talkative when not suffering from these. In either mood, I got 
along with him well. We borrowed Henry's car, drove to Maine so he could 
have a club sandwich in a bar he liked there; went to Bennington, Manchester, 
the greyhound track in Pownal, where he ended up bringing home a dog too 
old to race, in order to save it from being put to sleep. The dog's name was 
Frost. It loved Camilla, and followed her everywhere: Henry quoted long 
passages about Emma Bovary and her greyhound: 'Sa pensee, sans but 
d'abord, vagabonda. it au hasard, comme sa levrette, quifaisait des cercles 
clans la campagne...' But the dog was weak, and highly strung, and suffered a 
heart attack one bright December morning in the country, leaping from the 
porch in happy pursuit of a squirrel. This was by no means unexpected; the 
man at the track had warned Charles that she might not live the week; still, the 
twins were upset, and we spent a sad afternoon burying her in the back garden 


of Francis's house, where one of I Francis's aunts had an elaborate cat 
cemetery, complete with headstones. 


The dog was fond of Bunny, too. It used to go with Bunny and me on long, 
grueling rambles through the countryside every Sunday, over fences and 
streams, through bogs and pastures. 


Bunny was himself as fond of walks as an old dog — his hikes were so 
exhausting, he had a hard time finding anyone to accompany him except me 
and the dog — but it was because of those walks that I became familiar with 
the land around Hampden, the logging roads and hunter's trails, all his hidden 
waterfalls and secret swimming holes. 


Bunny's girlfriend, Marion, was around surprisingly little; partially, I think, 
because he didn't want her there but also, I think, because she was even less 
interested in us than we were in her. 


(‘She likes to be with her girlfriends a lot,’ Bunny would say boastfully to 
Charles and me. "They talk about clothes and boys and all that kind of 
malarkey. You know.') She was a small, petulant blonde from Connecticut, 
pretty in the same standard, round-faced way in which Bunny was handsome, 
and her manner of dress was at once girlish and shockingly matronly — 
flowered skirts, monogrammed sweaters with bags and shoes to match. 


From time to time I would see her at a distance in the playground of the 
Early Childhood Center as I walked to class. It was some branch of the 
Elementary Education department at Hampden; kids from the town went to 
nursery school and kindergarten there, and there she would be with them, in 
her monogrammed sweaters, blowing a whistle and trying to make them all 
shut up and get in line. 


No one would talk about it much, but I gathered that earlier, abortive 
attempts to include Marion in the activities of the group had ended in disaster. 
She liked Charles, who was generally polite to everyone and had the 
unflagging capacity to carry on conversations with anyone from little kids to 
the ladies who worked in the cafeteria; and she regarded Henry, as did most I 
everyone who knew him. with a kind of fearful respect; but she hated Camilla, 
and between her and Francis there had been some m catastrophic incident 
which was so frightful that no one would even talk about it. She and Bunny 
had a relationship the likes of which I had seldom seen except in couples 
married for twenty years or more, a relationship which vacillated between the 
touching and the annoying. In her dealings with him she was very bossy and 
businesslike, treating him in much the same way she handled her kindergarten 
pupils; he responded in kind, alternately wheedling, affectionate, or sulky. 
Most of the time he bore her nagging patiently, but when he did not, terrible 


fights ensued. 


Sometimes he would knock on my door late at night, looking haggard and 
wild-eyed and more rumpled than usual, mumbling, 'Lemme in, old man, you 
gotta help me, Marion's on the warpath...' Minutes later, there would be a neat 
report of sharp knocks at the door: rat-a-tat-tat. It would be Marion, her little 
mouth tight, looking like a small, angry doll. 


Is Bunny there?’ she would say, stretching up on tiptoe and craning to look 
past me into the room. 


‘He's not here. 

"Are you sure?’ 

‘He's not here, Marion.’ 

‘Bunny!’ she would call out ominously. 
No answer. 

‘Bunny!’ 


And then, to my acute embarrassment, Bunny would emerge sheepishly in 
the doorway. 'Hello, sweetie,’ 'Where have you been?’ 


Bunny would hem and haw. 
"Well, I think we need to talk.’ 
T'm busy now, honey.’ 


"Well' — she would look at her tasteful little Cartier watch 'I'm going home 
now. I'll be up for about thirty minutes and then I'm going to sleep. 


Tine.’ 

T'll see you in about twenty minutes, then." 

"Hey, wait just a second there. I never said I was going to ' 
‘See you in a little while,’ she would say, and leave. 

Tm not going,’ Bunny would say. 

'No, I wouldn't.' 


'I mean, who does she think she is." 


‘Don't go.' 

‘I mean, gotta teach her a lesson sometime. I'm a busy man. 
On the move. My time's my own.' 

"Exactly.' 

An uneasy silence would fall. Finally Bunny would get up. 
‘Guess I better go.' 

"All right, Bun.' 


'I mean, I'm not gonna go over to Marion's, if that's what you think,’ he'd say 
defensively. 


‘Of course not.' 
"Yes, yes,’ Bunny would say distractedly, and bluster away. 


The next day, he and Marion would be having lunch together or walking 
down by the playground. 'So you and Marion got everything straightened out, 
huh?’ one of us would ask when next we saw him alone. 


‘Oh, yeah,’ Bunny would say, embarrassed. 


The weekends at Francis's house were the happiest times. The trees turned 
early that fall but the days stayed warm well into October, and in the country 
we spent most of our time outside. 


Apart from the occasional, half-hearted game of tennis (overhead volley 
going out of court; poking dispiritedly in the tall grass with the ends of our 
rackets for the lost ball) we never did anything very athletic; something about 
the place inspired a magnificent laziness I hadn't known since childhood. 


Now that I think about it, it seems while we were out there we drank almost 
constantly — never very much at once, but the I thin liicklc of spirits which 
began with the Bloody Marys at ^ breakfast would last until bedtime, and that, 
more than anything ™ else, was probably responsible for our torpor. Bringing 
a book outside to read, I would fall asleep almost immediately in my chair; 
when I took the boat out I soon tired of rowing and allowed myself to drift all 
afternoon. (That boat! Sometimes, even now, when I have trouble sleeping, I 
try to imagine that I am lying in that rowboat, my head pillowed on the cross- 
slats of the stern, water lapping hollow through the wood and yellow birch 
leaves floating down to brush my face.) Occasionally, we would attempt 
something a little more ambitious. Once, when Francis found a Beretta and 


ammunition in his aunt's night table, we went through a brief spate of target 
practice (the greyhound, jumpy from years of the starting gun, had to be 
secluded in the cellar), shooting at mason jars that were lined on a wicker tea- 
table we'd dragged into the yard. But that came to a quick end when Henry, 
who was very nearsighted, shot and killed a duck by mistake. He was quite 
shaken by it and we put the pistol away. 


The others liked croquet, but Bunny and I didn't; neither of us ever quite got 
the hang of it, and we always hacked and sliced at the ball as if we were 
playing golf. Every now and then, we roused ourselves sufficiently to go on a 
picnic. We were always too ambitious at the outset — the menu elaborate, the 
chosen spot distant and obscure — and they invariably ended with all of us hot 
and sleepy and slightly drunk, reluctant to start the long trudge home with the 
picnic things. Usually we lay around on the grass all afternoon, drinking 
martinis from a thermos bottle and watching the ants crawl in a glittering 
black thread on the messy cake plate, until finally the martinis ran out, and the 
sun went down, and we had to straggle home for dinner in the dark. 


It was always a tremendous occasion if Julian accepted an invitation to 
dinner in the country. Francis would order all kinds of food from the grocery 
store and leaf through cookbooks and worry for days about what to serve, 
what wine to serve with it, which dishes to use, what to have in the wings as a 
backup course should the souffle fall. Tuxedos went to the cleaners; flowers 
came from the florists; Bunny put away his copy of The Bride of Fu Manchu 
and started carrying around a volume of Homer instead. 


I don't know why we insisted on making such a production of these dinners, 
because by the time Julian arrived we were invariably nervous and exhausted. 
They were a dreadful strain for everyone, the guest included, I am sure — 
though he always behaved with the greatest good cheer, and was graceful, and 
charming, and unflaggingly delighted with everyone and everything — this 
despite the fact that he only accepted on the average about one of every three 
such invitations. I found myself less able to conceal the evidences of stress, in 
my uncomfortable borrowed tuxedo, and with my _less-than-extensive 
knowledge of dining etiquette. The others were more practiced at this 
particular dissimulation. Five minutes before Julian arrived, they might be 
slouched in the living room — curtains drawn, dinner simmering on chafing 
dishes in the kitchen, everyone tugging at collars and dull-eyed with fatigue — 
but the instant the doorbell rang their spines would straighten, conversation 
would snap to life, the very wrinkles would fall from their clothes. 


Though, at the time, I found those dinners wearing and troublesome, now I 
find something very wonderful in my memory of them: that dark cavern of a 
room, with vaulted ceilings and a fire crackling in the fireplace, our faces 
luminous somehow, and ghostly pale. The firelight magnified our shadows, 


glinted off the silver, flickered high upon the walls; its reflection roared 
orange in the windowpanes as if a city were burning outside. The whoosh of 
the flames was like a flock of birds, trapped and beating in a whirlwind near 
the ceiling. And I wouldn't have been at all surprised if the long mahogany 
banquet table, draped in linen, laden with china and candles and fruit and 
flowers, had simply vanished into thin air, like a magic casket in a fairy story. 


There is a recurrent scene from those dinners that surfaces again and again, 
like an obsessive undercurrent in a dream. Julian, at the head of the long table, 
rises to his feet and lifts his wineglass. 


‘Live forever, he says. 


And the rest of us rise too, and clink our glasses across the table, like an 
army regiment crossing sabres: Henry and Bunny, Charles and Francis, 
Camilla and I. 'Live forever,’ we chorus, throwing our glasses back in unison. 


And always, always, that same toast. Live forever. 


I wonder now that I was around them so much and yet knew so little of what 
was happening at the end of that term. Physically, there was very little 
indication that anything was happening at all — they were too clever for that — 
but even the tiny discrepancies that squeaked through their guard I met with a 
kind of willful blindness. That is to say: I wanted to maintain the illusion that 
their dealings with me were completely straightforward; that we were all 
friends, and no secrets, though the plain fact of it was that there were plenty of 
things they didn't let me in on and would not for some time. And though I 
tried to ignore this I was aware of it all the same. I knew, for instance, that the 
five of them sometimes did things — what, exactly, I didn't know — without 
inviting me, and that if put on the spot they would all stick together and lie 
about it, in a casual and quite convincing fashion. They were so convincing, in 
fact, so faultlessly orchestrated in the variations and counterpoint of falsehood 
(the twins' unblinking carelessness striking a bright true note against Bunny's 
tomfoolery, or Henry's bored irritation at rehashing a trivial sequence of 
events) that I usually found myself believing them, often against evidence to 
the contrary. 


Of course, I can see traces of what went on — to their credit, quite small 
traces — in retrospect; in the way they would sometimes disappear, very 
mysteriously, and hours later be vague about their whereabouts; in private 
jokes, asides in Greek or even I Latin which I was well aware were meant to 
go over my head. 


Naturally, I disliked this, but there seemed nothing alarming or unusual 
about it; though some of those casual remarks and private jokes assumed a 


horrific significance much later. Towards the end of that term, for instance, 
Bunny had a maddening habit of breaking out into choruses of'The Farmer in 
the Dell’; I found it merely annoying and could not understand the violent 
agitation to which it provoked the rest of them: not knowing then, as I do 
now, that it must have chilled them all to the bone. 


Of course I noticed things. I suppose, being around them as much as I was, it 
would have been impossible not to. But they were mostly quirks, 
discrepancies, most of them so minor that it will perhaps show you how little 
reason I had to imagine that anything was wrong. For instance: All five of 
them seemed unusually accident-prone. They were always getting scratched 
by cats, or cutting themselves shaving, or stumbling over footstools in the 
dark — reasonable explanations, certainly, but for sedentary people they had an 
odd excess of bruises and small wounds. There was also a strange 
preoccupation with the weather; strange, to me, because none of them seemed 
to be involved in activity which might be aided or impeded by weather of any 
sort. And yet they were obsessed with it, Henry in particular. He was 
concerned, primarily, with rapid drops in temperature; sometimes, in the car, 
he would punch around as frantically on the radio as a sea captain before a 
storm, searching for barometric readings, long-range forecasts, data of any 
sort. 


The news that the mercury was sinking would plunge him into a sudden, 
inexplicable gloom. I wondered what he would do when winter came; but by 
the first snowfall, the preoccupation had vanished, never to return. 


Little things. I remember waking up once in the country at six o'clock, while 
everyone was still in bed, and going downstairs to find the kitchen floors 
freshly washed, still wet, immaculate except for the bare, mysterious footprint 
of a Man Friday in the I clean sandbank between water heater and porch 
Sometimes 1 woke nights out there, half-dreaming, but vaguely conscious of 
Hi something; muffled voices, movement, the greyhound whining softly and 
pawing at my bedroom door... Once I heard a muttered exchange between the 
twins about some bed sheets. 


‘Silly,’ Camilla was whispering — and I caught a glimpse of ragged, fluttering 
cloth, streaked with mud — 'you took the wrong ones. 


We can't bring them back like this. 
"We'll substitute the others.’ 


‘But they'll know. The Linen Service ones have a stamp. We'll have to say 
we lost them.' 


Though this exchange did not remain in my mind for long, I was puzzled, 


and even more so by the twins' unsatisfactory manner when I asked about it. 
Another oddity was my discovery, one afternoon, of a large copper pot 
bubbling on the back burner of the stove, a peculiar smell emanating from it. I 
lifted the lid and a cloud of pungent, bitter steam hit me in the face. The pot 
was filled with limp, almond-shaped leaves, boiling away in about half a 
gallon of blackish water. What in God's name, I thought, perplexed but also 
amused, and when I asked Francis he said, curtly, 'For my bath.’ 


It is easy to see things in retrospect. But I was ignorant then of everything 
but my own happiness, and I don't know what else to say except that life itself 
seemed very magical in those days: a web of symbol, coincidence, 
premonition, omen. Everything, somehow, fit together; some sly and 
benevolent Providence was revealing itself by degrees and I felt myself 
trembling on the brink of a fabulous discovery, as though any morning it was 
all going to come together — my future, my past, the whole of my life — and I 
was going to sit up in bed like a thunderbolt and say oh! oh! oh! 


We had so many happy days in the country that fall that from this vantage 
they merge into a sweet and indistinct blur. Around Halloween the last, 
stubborn wildflowers died away and the wind became sharp and gusty, 
blowing sbowers of yellow leaves on the gray, wrinkled surface of the lake. 
On those chill afternoons when the sky was like lead and the clouds were 
racing, we stayed in the library, banking huge fires to keep warm. Bare 
willows clicked on the windowpanes like skeleton fingers. While the twins 
played cards at one end of the table, and Henry worked at the other, Francis 
sat curled in the window seat with a plate of little sandwiches in his lap, 
reading, in French, the Memoires of the Due de Saint-Simon, which for some 
reason he was determined to get through. He had gone to several schools in 
Europe and spoke excellent French, though he pronounced it with the same 
lazy, snob accent as his English; sometimes I got him to help me with my own 
lessons in first-year French, tedious little stories about Marie and Jean-Claude 
going to the tabac, which he read aloud in a languishing, hilarious drawl 
(‘Marie a apporte des legumes a son frere') that sent everyone into hysterics. 
Bunny lay on his stomach on the hearth rug, doing his homework; 
occasionally he would steal one of Francis's sandwiches or ask a pained 
question. Though Greek gave him so much trouble, he'd actually studied it far 
longer than any of the rest of us, since he was twelve, a circumstance about 
which he perpetually boasted. He suggested slyly that this had simply been a 
childish whim of his, a manifestation of early genius a la Alexander Pope; but 
the truth of the matter (as I learned from Henry) was that he suffered from 
fairly severe dyslexia and the Greek had been a mandatory course of therapy, 
his prep school having theorized it was good to force dyslexic students to 
study languages like Greek, Hebrew, and Russian, which did not utilize the 
Roman alphabet. At any rate, his talent as a linguist was considerably less 
than he led one to believe, and he was unable to wade through even the 


simplest assignments without continual questions, complaints, and infusions 
of food. Towards the end of term he had a flare-up of asthma and wandered 
wheezing around the house in pajamas and bathrobe, hair standing on end, 
gasping theatrically at his I inhaler. The pills he took for it (1 was informed, 
behind his back) made him irritable, kept him up at night, made him gain 
weight. 


And I accepted this explanation for much of Bunny's crabbiness at the end of 
the term, which subsequently I was to find was due to entirely different 
reasons. 


What should I tell you? About the Saturday in December that Bunny ran 
around the house at five in the morning, yelling 'First snow!’ and pouncing on 
our beds? Or the time Camilla tried to teach me the box step; or the time 
Bunny turned the boat over — with Henry and Francis in it — because he 
thought he saw a water snake? About Henry's birthday party, or about the two 
instances when Francis's mother— all red hair and alligator pumps and 
emeralds — turned up on her way to New York, trailing the Yorkshire terrier 
and the second husband? (She was a wild card, that mother of his; and Chris, 
her new husband, was a bit player * in a soap opera, barely older than Francis. 
Olivia was her name. 


At the time I first met her, she had just been released from the Betty Ford 
Center after having been cured of alcoholism and an unspecified drug habit, 
and was launching merrily down the path of sin again. Charles once told me 
that she had knocked on his door in the middle of the night and asked if he 
would care to join her and Chris in bed. I still get cards from her at 
Christmas.) 


One day, however, remains particularly vivid, a brilliant Saturday in 
October, one of the last summery days we had that year. 


The night before — which had been rather cold — we'd stayed up drinking and 
talking till almost dawn, and I woke late, hot and vaguely nauseated, to find 
my blankets kicked to the foot of the bed and sun pouring through the 
window. I lay very still for a long time. The sun filtered through my eyelids a 
bright, painful red, and my damp legs prickled with the heat. Beneath me, the 
house was silent, shimmering and oppressive. 


I made my way downstairs, my feet creaking on the steps. 


The house was motionless, empty. Finally I found Francis and Bunny on the 
shady side of the porch. Bunny had on a T-shirt and a pair of Bermuda shorts; 
Francis, his face flushed a blotchy albino pink, and his eyelids closed and 
almost fluttering with pain, was wearing a ratty terry-cloth bathrobe that was 


stolen from a hotel. 


They were drinking prairie oysters. Francis pushed his over to me without 
looking at it. 'Here, drink this,’ he said, Till be sick if I look at it another 
second.' 


The yolk quivered, gently, in its bloody bath of ketchup and Worcestershire 
.7 don't want it,' I said, and pushed it back. 


He crossed his legs and pinched the bridge of his nose between thumb and 
forefinger. 'I don't know why I make these things,’ he said. "They never work. I 
have to go get some Alka-Seltzer.’ 


Charles closed the screen door behind him and wandered listlessly onto the 
porch in his red-striped bathrobe. ‘What you need,’ he said, ‘is an ice-cream 
float.’ 


"You and your ice-cream floats.’ 


‘They work, I tell you. It's very scientific. Cold things are good for nausea 
and —' 


"You're always saying that, Charles, but I just don't think it's true.’ 


"Would you just listen to me for a second? The ice cream slows down your 
digestion. The Coke settles your stomach and the caffeine cures your 
headache. Sugar gives you energy. And besides, it makes you metabolize the 
alcohol faster. It's the perfect food.’ 


'Go make me one, would you?’ said Bunny. 
'Go make it yourself,’ said Charles, suddenly irritable. 
‘Really,’ Francis said, 'I think I just need an Alka-Seltzer. 


Henry — who had been up, and dressed, since the first wink of dawn — came 
down shortly, followed by a sleepy Camilla, damp and flushed from her bath, 
and her gold chrysanthemum of a head curled and chaotic. It was almost two 
in the afternoon. The greyhound lay on its side, drowsing, one chestnut- 
colored eye only partly closed and rolling grotesquely in the socket. 


There was no Alka-Seltzer, so Francis went in and got a bottle of ginger ale 
and some glasses and ice and we sat for a while as the afternoon got brighter 
and hotter. Camilla — who was rarely content to sit still but was always itching 
to do something, anything, play cards, go for a picnic or a drive — was bored 
and restless, and made no secret of it. She had a book, but she wasn't reading; 


her legs were thrown over the arm of her chair, one bare heel kicking, with 
obstinate, lethargic rhythm, at the wicker side. Finally, as much to humor her 
as anything, Francis suggested a walk to the lake. This cheered her instantly. 
There was nothing else to do, so Henry and I decided to go along. Charles and 
Bunny were asleep, and snoring in their chairs. 


The sky was a fierce, burning blue, the trees ferocious shades of red and 
yellow. Francis, barefoot and still in his bathrobe, stepped precariously over 
rocks and branches, balancing his glass of ginger ale. Once we got to the lake 
he waded in, up to his knees, and beckoned dramatically like Saint John the 
Baptist. 


We took off our shoes and socks. The water near the bank was a clear, pale 
green, cool over my ankles, and the pebbles at the bottom were dappled with 
sunlight. Henry, in coat and tie, waded out to where Francis stood, his trousers 
rolled to the knee, an old-fashioned banker in a surrealist painting. A wind 
rustled through the birches, blowing up the pale undersides of the leaves, and 
it caught in Camilla's dress and billowed it out like a white balloon. She 
laughed, and smoothed it down quickly, only to have it blow out again. 


The two of us walked near the shore, in the shallows barely covering our 
feet. The sun shimmered off the lake in bright waves — it didn't look like a real 
lake but a mirage in the Sahara. 


Henry and Francis were further out: Francis talking, gesticulating wildly in 
his white robe and Henry with his hands clasped behind his back, Satan 
listening patiently to the rantings of some desert prophet. 


We walked a good distance around the lake's edge, she and I, ^ then started 
back. Camilla, one hand shading her light-dazzled V eyes, was telling me a 
long story about something the dog had done — chewing up a sheepskin rug 
that belonged to the landlord, their efforts to disguise and finally to destroy the 
evidence — but I wasn't following her very closely: she looked so much like 
her brother, yet his straightforward, uncompromising good looks were almost 
magical when repeated, with only slight variations, in her. She was a living 
reverie for me: the mere sight of her sparked an almost infinite range of 
fantasy, from Greek to Gothic, from vulgar to divine. 


I was looking at the side of her face, listening to the sweet, throaty cadences 
of her voice, when I was jolted from my musing by a sharp exclamation. She 
stopped. 


"What is it?’ M She was staring down at the water. 'Look,' In the water, a 
dark plume of blood blossomed by her foot; as I blinked, a thin red tendril 
spiraled up and curled over her pale toes, undulating in the water like a thread 


of crimson smoke. 
‘Jesus, what did you do?’ 


'I don't know. I stepped on something sharp.’ She put a hand on my shoulder 
and I held her by the waist. There was a shard of green glass, about three 
inches long, stuck in her foot just above the arch. The blood pulsed thickly 
with her heartbeat; the glass, stained with red, glittered wickedly in the sun. 


"What is it?’ she said, trying to lean over to see. 'Is it bad?’ 
She had cut an artery. The blood was spurting out strong and fast. 
‘Francis?’ I yelled. 'Henry?' 


"Mother of God,' said Francis when he got close enough to see, and started 
splashing towards us, holding the skirt of his robe out of the water with one 
hand. 'What have you done to yourself? 


Can you walk? Let me see,’ he said, out of breath. 


Camilla tightened her grip on my arm. The bottom of her foot was glazed 
with red. Fat droplets ticked off the edge, spreading and dispersing like drops 
of ink in the clear water. 


‘Oh, God,’ said Francis, closing his eyes. 'Does it hurt?’ 


‘No,’ she said briskly, but I knew it did; I could feel her trembling and her 
face had gone white. 


Suddenly Henry was there, too, leaning over her. 'Put your arm around my 
neck,’ he said; deftly he whisked her up, as lightly as if she were made of 
straw, one arm under her head and the other beneath her knees. 'Francis, run 
get the first-aid kit out of your car. We'll meet you halfway.’ 


‘All right,’ said Francis, glad to be told what to do, and started splashing for 
the bank. 


"Henry, put me down. I'm bleeding all over you. 


He didn't pay any attention to her. 'Here, Richard,' he said, 'get that sock and 
tie it around her ankle.’ 


It was the first time I had even thought of a tourniquet; some kind of doctor I 
would have made. "Too tight?’ I asked her. 


‘That's fine. Henry, I wish you'd put me down. I'm too heavy for you.’ 


He smiled at her. There was a slight chip in one of his front teeth I'd never 
noticed before; it gave his smile a very engaging quality. "You're light as a 
feather,’ he said. 


Sometimes, when there's been an accident and reality is too sudden and 
strange to comprehend, the surreal will take over. 


Action slows to a dreamlike glide, frame by frame; the motion of a hand, a 
sentence spoken, fills an eternity. Little things — a cricket on a stem, the 
veined branches on a leaf— are magnified, brought from the background in 
achingly clear focus. And that was what happened then, walking over the 
meadow to the house. 


It was like a painting too vivid to be real — every pebble, every blade of grass 
sharply defined, the sky so blue it hurt me to look at it. Camilla was limp in 
Henry's arms, her head thrown back like a dead girl's, and the curve of her 
throat beautiful and lifeless. 


The hem of her dress fluttered abstractly in the breeze. Henry's trousers were 
spattered with drops the size of quarters, too red to be blood, as if he'd had a 
paintbrush slung at him. In the overwhelming stillness, between our echoless 
footsteps, the pulse sang thin and fast in my ears. 


Charles skidded down the hill, barefoot, still in his bathrobe, Francis at his 
heels. Henry knelt and set her on the grass, and she raised herself on her 
elbows. 


‘Camilla, are you dead?’ said Charles, breathless, as he dropped to the ground 
to look at the wound. 


‘Somebody,’ said Francis, unrolling a length of bandage, 'is going to have to 
take that glass out of her foot.' 


"Want me to try?' said Charles, looking up at her. 
‘Be careful.’ 


Charles, her heel in his hand, caught the glass between thumb and forefinger 
and pulled gently. Camilla caught her breath in a quick, wincing gasp. 


Charles drew back like he'd been scalded. He made as if to touch her foot 
again, but he couldn't quite bring himself to do it. His fingertips were wet with 
blood. 


"Well, go on,’ said Camilla, her voice fairly steady. 


T can't do it. I'm afraid I'll hurt you.’ 
‘Tt hurts anyway. 
'I can't,’ Charles said miserably, looking up at her. 


‘Get out of the way,' said Henry impatiently, and he knelt quickly and took 
her foot in his hand. 


Charles turned away; he was almost as white as she was, and I wondered if 
that old story was true, that one twin felt pain when the other was injured. 


Camilla flinched, her eyes wide; Henry held up the curved piece of glass in 
one bloody hand. 'Consummatum est,' he said. 


Francis set to work with the iodine and the bandages. 
"My God,’ I said, picking up the red-stained shard and holding it to the light. 


‘Good girl,’ said Francis, winding the bandages around the arch of her foot. 
Like most hypochondriacs, he had an oddly soothing bedside manner. 'Look 
at you. You didn't even cry. 


‘It didn't hurt that much.’ 
‘The hell it didn't,’ Francis said. "You were really brave.’ 
Henry stood up. 'She was brave,’ he said. 


Late that afternoon, Charles and I were sitting on the porch. It had turned 
suddenly cold; the sky was brilliantly sunny but the wind was up. Mr Hatch 
had come inside to start a fire, and I smelled a faint tang of wood smoke. 
Francis was inside, too, starting dinner; he was singing, and his high, clear 
voice, slightly out of key, floated out the kitchen window. 


Camilla's cut hadn't been a serious one. Francis drove her to the emergency 
room — Bunny went, too, because he was annoyed at having slept through the 
excitement — and in an hour she was back, with six stitches in her foot, a 
bandage, and a bottle of Tylenol with codeine. Now Bunny and Henry were 
out playing croquet and she was with them, hopping around on her good foot 
and the toe of the other with a skipping gait that, from the porch, looked oddly 
jaunty. 


Charles and I were drinking whiskey and soda. He had been trying to teach 
me to play piquet (‘because it's what Rawdon Crawley plays in Vanity Fait’) 
but I was a slow learner and the cards lay abandoned. 


Charles took a sip of his drink. He hadn't bothered to dress all day. 'I wish 
we didn't have to go back to Hampden tomorrow, ' he said. 


'I wish we never had to go back,’ I said. 'I wish we lived here." 
"Well, maybe we can.’ 

"What?' 

'I don't mean now. But maybe we could. After school.' 

"How's that?’ 


He shrugged. "Well, Francis's aunt won't sell the house because she wants to 
keep it in the family. Francis could get it no from her for next to nothing when 
he turns twenty-one. And even if he couldn't, Henry has more money than he 
knows what to do with. They could go in together and buy it. Easy,' I was 
startled by this pragmatic answer. 


'I mean, all Henry wants to do when he finishes school, if he finishes, is to 
find some place where he can write his books and study the Twelve Great 
Cultures.’ 


"What do you mean, if he finishes?’ 


‘I mean, he may not want to. He may get bored. He's talked about leaving 
before. There's no reason he's got to be here, and he's surely never going to 
have a job.' 


"You think not?’ I said, curious; I had always pictured Henry teaching Greek, 
in some forlorn but excellent college out in the Midwest. 


Charles snorted. 'Certainly not. Why should he? He doesn't need the money, 
and he'd make a terrible teacher. And Francis has never worked in his life. I 
guess he could live with his mother, except he can't stand that husband of 
hers. He'd like it better here. Julian wouldn't be far away, either.’ 


I took a sip of my drink and looked out at the faraway figures on the lawn. 
Bunny, hair falling into his eyes, was preparing to make a shot, flexing the 
mallet and shifting back and forth on his feet like a professional golfer. 


"Does Julian have any family?’ I said. 


‘No,’ said Charles, his mouth full of ice. 'He has some nephews but he hates 
them. Look at this, would you,’ he said suddenly, half rising from his chair. 


I looked. Across the lawn, Bunny had finally made his shot; the ball went 


wide of the sixth and seventh arches but, incredibly, hit the turning stake. 
"Watch,’ I said. 'I bet he'll try for another shot.’ 


"He won't get it, though,’ said Charles, sitting down again, his eyes still on 
the lawn. 'Look at Henry. He's putting his foot down,' in Henry was pointing 
at the neglected arches and, even at that distance, I could tell he was quoting 
from the rule book; faintly, we could hear Bunny's startled cries of protest. 


"My hangover's about gone,’ Charles said presently. 


"Mine, too,’ I said. The light on the lawn was golden, casting long velvety 
shadows, and the cloudy, radiant sky was straight out of Constable; though I 
didn't want to admit it, I was about half-drunk. 


We were quiet for a while, watching. From the lawn I could hear the faint 
pock of mallet against croquet ball; from the window, above the clatter of pots 
and the slamming of cabinets, Francis was singing, as though it was the 
happiest song in the world:' «We are little black sheep who have gone 
astray... Baa baa baa.. 


‘And if Francis buys the house?’ I said finally. "Think he'd let us live here?’ 


‘Sure. He'd be bored stiff if it was just him and Henry. I guess Bunny might 
have to work in the bank but he could always come up on weekends, if he 
leaves Marion and the kids at home.’ 


I laughed. Bunny had been talking the night before about how he wanted 
eight children, four boys and four girls; which had prompted a long, 
humorless speech from Henry about how the fulfillment of the reproductive 
cycle was, in nature, an invariable harbinger of swift decline and death. 


‘It's terrible,’ said Charles. 'Really, I can just see him. Standing out in a yard 
wearing some kind of stupid apron.’ 


‘Cooking hamburgers on the grill.’ 

‘And about twenty kids running around him and screaming.’ 
"Kiwanis picnics.’ 

"La-Z-Boy recliners.’ 

‘Jesus. 


A sudden wind rustled through the birches; a gust of yellow leaves came 
storming down. I took a sip of my drink. If I had grown up in that house I 


couldn't have loved it more, couldn't have been more familiar with the creak 
of the swing, or the pattern of the clematis vines on the trellis, or the velvety 
swell of land as it faded to gray on the horizon, and the strip of highway 
visible —just barely — in the hills, beyond the trees. The very colors of the 
place had seeped into my blood: just as Hampden, in subsequent years, would 
always present itself immediately to my imagination in a confused whirl of 
white and green and red, so the country house first appeared as a glorious blur 
of watercolors, of ivory and lapis blue, chestnut and burnt orange and gold, 
separating only gradually into the boundaries of remembered objects: the 
house, the sky, the maple trees. But even that day, there on the porch, with 
Charles beside me and the smell of wood smoke in the air, it had the quality 
of a memory; there it was, before my eyes, and yet too beautiful to believe. 


It was getting dark; soon it would be time for dinner. I finished my drink in a 
swallow. The idea of living there, of not having to go back ever again to 
asphalt and shopping malls and modular furniture; of living there with Charles 
and Camilla and Henry and Francis and maybe even Bunny; of no one 
marrying or going home or getting a job in a town a thousand miles away or 
doing any of the traitorous things friends do after college; of everything 
remaining exactly as it was, that instant — the idea was so truly heavenly that 
I'm not sure I thought, even then, it could ever really happen, but I like to 
believe I did. 


Francis was working up to a big finish on his song. ' «Gentlemen songsters 
off on a spree... Doomed from here to eternity Charles looked at me 
sideways. 'So, what about you?’ he said. 


"What do you mean?’ 


‘I mean, do you have any plans?’ He laughed. 'What are you doing for the 
next forty or fifty years of your life?’ 


Out on the lawn, Bunny had just knocked Henry's ball about seventy feet 
outside the court. There was a ragged burst of laughter; faint, but clear, it 
floated back across the evening air. 


That laughter haunts me still. 


Chapter 3 ^ 


From the first moment I set foot in Hampden, I had begun to dread the end of 
term, when I would have to go back to Piano, and flat land, and filling 
stations, and dust. As the term wore on, and the snow got deeper and the 
mornings blacker and every day brought me closer to the date on the smeared 
mimeograph (‘December 17 — All Final Papers Due’) taped inside my closet 
door, my melancholy began to turn into something like alarm. I did not think I 
could stand a Christmas at my parents' house, with a plastic tree and no snow 
and the TV going constantly. It was not as if my parents were so anxious to 
have me, either. In recent years they had fallen in with a gabby, childless 
couple, older than they were, called the Mac Natts. Mr Mac Natt was an auto- 
parts salesman; Mrs Mac Natt was shaped like a pigeon and sold Avon. They 
had got my parents doing things like taking bus trips to factory outlets and 
playing a dice game called 'bunko' and hanging around the piano bar at the 
Ramada Inn. These activities picked up considerably around holidays and my 
presence, brief and irregular as it was, was regarded as a hindrance and 
something of a reproach. 


But the holidays were only half the trouble. Because Hampden was so far 
north, and because the buildings were old and expensive to heat, the school 
was closed during January and February. 


Already I could hear my father complaining beerily about me to Mr Mac 
Natt, Mr Mac Natt slyly goading him on with remarks insinuating that I was 
spoiled and that he wouldn't allow any son of his to walk all over him, if he 
had one. This would drive my father into a fury; eventually he would come 
busting dramatically into my room and order me out, his forefinger trembling, 
rolling his eyes like Othello. He had done this several times when I was in 
high school and in college in California, for no reason really except to display 
his authority in front of my mother and his co-workers. I was always 
welcomed back as soon as he tired of the attention and allowed my mother to 
‘talk some sense’ into him, but what about now? I didn't even have a bedroom 
in California anymore; in October, my mother had written to say that she had 
sold the furniture and turned it into a sewing room. 


Henry and Bunny were going to Italy over the winter vacation, to Rome. I 
was surprised at this announcement, which Bunny had made at the beginning 
of December, especially since the two of them had been out of sorts for over a 
month, Henry in particular. Bunny, I knew, had been hitting him hard for 
money in the past weeks, but though Henry complained about this he seemed 
oddly incapable of refusing him. I was fairly sure that it wasn't the money per 
se, but the principle of it; I was also fairly sure that whatever tension existed, 


Bunny was oblivious of it. 


The trip was all Bunny talked about. He bought clothes, guidebooks, a 
record called Parliamo Italiano which promised to teach the listener Italian in 
two weeks or less (‘Even to those who've never had luck with other language 
courses!’ boasted the jacket) and a copy of Dorothy Sayers's translation of 
Inferno. He knew I had nowhere to go for the winter vacation and enjoyed 
rubbing salt in my wounds. 'T'll be thinking of you while I'm drinking Campari 
and riding the gondolas,' he said, winking. 


Henry had little to say about the trip. As Bunny rattled on he would sit 
smoking with deep, resolute drags, pretending not to understand Bun's 
fallacious Italian. 


Francis said he'd be happy to have me to Christmas in Boston and then travel 
on with him to New York; the twins phoned their grandmother in Virginia and 
she said she'd be glad to have me there, too, for the entire winter break. But 
there was the question of money. For the months until school began I would 
have to have a job. I needed money if I wanted to come back in the spring, 
and I couldn't very well work if I was gallivanting around with Francis. The 
twins would he clerking, as they always did during holidays, with their uncle 
the lawyer, but they had quite a time stretching the job to fat the two of them, 
Charles driving Uncle Orman to the occasional estate sale and to the package 
store, Camilla sitting around the office waiting to answer a phone that never 
rang. I am sure it never occurred to them that I might want a job, too — all my 
tales of Californian richesse had hit the mark harder than I'd thought. 'What'll 
I do while you're at work?' I asked them, hoping they would get my drift, but 
of course they didn't. 'I'm afraid there's not much to do,' said Charles 
apologetically. 'Read, talk to Nana, play with the dogs.’ 


My only choice, it seemed, was to stay in Hampden town. Dr Roland was 
willing to keep me on, though at a salary that wouldn't cover a decent rent. 
Charles and Camilla were subletting their apartment and Francis had a 
teenaged cousin staying in his; Henry's, for all I knew, was standing empty, 
but he didn't offer its use and I was too proud to ask. The house in the country 
was empty, too, but it was an hour from Hampden and I didn't have a car. 
Then I heard about an old hippie, an ex-Hampden student, who ran a musical- 
instrument workshop in an abandoned warehouse. He would let you live in 
the warehouse for free if you carved pegs or sanded a few mandolins now and 
again. 


Partly because 1 did not wish to be burdened with anyone's pity or contempt, 
I concealed the true circumstances of my stay. 


Unwanted during the holidays by my glamorous, good-for nothing parents, I 


had decided to stay alone in Hampden (at an unspecified location) and work 
on my Greek, spurning, in my pride, their craven offers of financial help. 


This stoicism, this Henrylike dedication to my studies and general contempt 
for the things of this world, won me admiration from all sides, particularly 
from Henry himself. 'I wouldn't mind being here myself this winter,’ he said to 
me one bleak night late in November as we were walking home from Charles 
and Camilla's, our shoes sunk to the ankles in the sodden leaves that covered 
the path. 'The school is boarded up and the stoics in town close by three in the 
afternoon. Everything's white and empty and there's no noise but the wind. In 
the old days the snow would drift up to the eaves of the roofs, and people 
would be trapped in their houses and starve to death. They wouldn't be found 
until spring.’ His voice was dreamy, quiet, but I was filled with uncertainty; in 
the winters where I lived it did not even snow. 


The last week of school was a flurry of packing, typing, plane reservations 
and phone calls home, for everybody but me. I had no need to finish my 
papers early because I had nowhere to go; I could pack at my leisure, after the 
dorms were empty. Bunny was the first to leave. For three weeks he had been 
in a panic over a paper he had to write for his fourth course, something called 
Masterworks of English Literature. The assignment was twenty-five pages on 
John Donne. We'd all wondered how he was going to do it, because he was 
not much of a writer; though his dyslexia was the convenient culprit the real 
problem was not that but his attention span, which was as short as a child's. 
He seldom read the required texts or supplemental books for any course. 
Instead, his knowledge of any given subject tended to be a hodgepodge of 
confused facts, often strikingly irrelevant or out of context, that he happened 
to remember from classroom discussions or believed himself to have read 
somewhere. When it was time to write a paper he would supplement these 
dubious fragments by cross-examination of Henry (whom he was in the habit 
of consulting, like an atlas) or with information from either The World Book 
Encyclopedia or a reference work entitled Men of Thought and Deed, a six- 
volume work by E. Tipton Chatsford, Rev., dating from the 18905, consisting 
of thumbnail sketches of great men through the ages, written for children, full 
of dramatic engravings. 


Anything Bunny wrote was bound to be alarmingly original, since he began 
with such odd working materials and managed to alter them further by his 
befuddled scrutiny, but the John Donne paper must have been the worst of all 
the bad papers he ever wrote (ironic, given that it was the only thing he ever 
wrote that saw print. After he disappeared, a journalist asked for an excerpt 
from the missing young scholar's work and Marion gave him a copy of it, a 
laboriously edited paragraph of which eventually found its way into People 
magazine). 


Somewhere, Bunny had heard that John Donne had been acquainted with 
Izaak Walton, and in some dim corridor of his mind this friendship grew 
larger and larger, until in his mind the two men were practically 
interchangeable. We never understood how this fatal connection had 
established itself: Henry blamed it on Men of Thought and Deed, but no one 
knew for sure. A week or two before the paper was due, he had started 
showing up in my room about two or three in the morning, looking as if he 
had just narrowly escaped some natural disaster, his tie askew and his eyes 
wild and rolling. 'Hello, hello,’ he would say, stepping in, running both hands 
through his disordered hair. 'Hope I didn't wake you, don't mind if I cut on the 
lights, do you, ah, here we go, yes, yes...' He would turn on the lights and 
then pace back and forth for a while without taking off his coat, hands clasped 
behind his back, shaking his head. Finally he would stop dead in his tracks 
and say, with a desperate look in his eye: 'Metahemeralism. 


Tell me about it. Everything you know. I gotta know something about 
metahemeralism.' 


Tm sorry. I don't know what that is.’ 


'I don't either,’ Bunny would say brokenly. 'Got to do with art or pastoralism 
or something. That's how I gotta tie together John Donne and Izaak Walton, 
see.' He would resume pacing. 


‘Donne. Walton. Metahemeralism. That's the problem as I see it.' 
‘Bunny, I don't think «metahemeralism» is even a word.' 


‘Sure it is. Comes from the Latin. Has to do with irony and the pastoral. 
Yeah. That's it. Painting or sculpture or something, maybe.’ 


‘Is it in the dictionary?’ 


‘Dunno. Don't know how to spell it. I mean' — he made a picture frame with 
his hands — 'the poet and the fisherman. Parfait. Boon companions. Out in the 
open spaces. Living the good life. Metahemeralism's gotta be the glue here, 
see?’ 


And so it would go, for sometimes half an hour or more, with Bunny raving 
about fishing, and sonnets, and heaven knew what, until in the middle of his 
monologue he would be struck by a brilliant thought and bluster off as 
suddenly as he had descended. 


He finished the paper four days before the deadline and ran around showing 
it to everyone before he turned it in. 


‘This is a nice paper, Bun -,' Charles said cautiously. 
"Thanks, thanks.’ 


‘But don't you think you ought to mention John Donne more often? Wasn't 
that your assignment?’ 


‘Oh, Donne,’ Bunny had said scoffingly. 'I don't want to drag him into this. 


Henry refused to read it. 'I'm sure it's over my head, Bunny, really,' he said, 
glancing over the first page. 'Say, what's wrong with this type?’ 


"Triple-spaced it,’ said Bunny proudly. 

‘These lines are about an inch apart.’ 

‘Looks kind of like free verse, doesn't it?’ 

Henry made a funny little snorting noise through his nose. 
‘Looks kind of like a menu,’ he said. 


All I remember about the paper was that it ended with the sentence 'And as 
we leave Donne and Walton on the shores of Metahemeralism, we wave a 
fond farewell to those famous chums of yore.’ We wondered if he would fail. 
But Bunny wasn't worried: the approaching trip to Italy, now close enough to 
cast the dark shadow of the Tower of Pisa over his bed at night, had thrown 
him into a state of high agitation and he was anxious to leave Hampden as 
soon as possible and dispense with his familial obligations so that he could 
embark. 


Brusquely he asked me, since I didn't have anything to do, would I come 
over and help him pack? I said I would, and arrived to find him dumping the 
contents of entire drawers into suitcases, clothes everywhere. I reached up and 
carefully took a framed Japanese print from the wall and laid it down on his 
desk: 'Don't touch that,’ he shouted, dropping his nightstand drawer on the 
floor with a bang and darting over to snatch up the print. "That thing's two 
hundred years old.' As a matter of fact, I knew that it was no such thing, since 
I happened a few weeks before to have seen him carefully razoring it from a 
book in the library; I said nothing, but I was so irritated that I left 
immediately, amidst what gruff excuses his pride permitted him. Later, after 
he had gone, I found an awkward note of apology in my mailbox, wrapped 
around a paperback copy of the poems of Rupert Brooke and a box of Junior 
Mints. 


Henry departed quickly and quietly. One night he told us he was leaving and 


the next day he was gone. (To St Louis? ahead to Italy? none of us knew.) 
Francis left the day after that and there were many elaborate and prolonged 
goodbyes — Charles, Camilla, and I standing by the side of the road, noses raw 
and ears half-frozen, while Francis shouted at us with the window rolled down 
and the motor idling and great clouds of white smoke billowing all around the 
Mustang for what must have been a good forty-five minutes. 


Perhaps because they were the last to leave, I hated to see the twins go most 
of all. After Francis's horn honks had faded into the snowy, echoless distance, 
we walked back to their house, not saying much, taking the path through the 
woods. When Charles turned on the light, I saw that the place was 
heartbreakingly neat — sink empty, floors waxed, and a row of suitcases by the 
door. 


The dining halls had closed at noon that day; it was snowing hard and getting 
dark and we didn't have a car; the refrigerator, freshly cleaned and smelling of 
Lysol, was empty. Sitting around the kitchen table we had a sad, makeshift 
dinner of canned mushroom soup, soda crackers, and tea without sugar or 
milk. 


The main topic of conversation was Charles and Camilla's itinerary — how 
they would manage the baggage, what time they should call the taxi in order 
to make a six-thirty train. I joined in this travel-talk but a deep melancholy 
that would not lift for many weeks had already begun to settle around me; the 
sound of Francis's car, receding and then disappearing in the snowy, muffled 
distance, was still in my ears, and for the first time I realized how lonely the 
next two months would really be, with the school closed, the snow deep, 
everyone gone. 


They'd told me not to bother seeing them off the next morning, they were 
leaving so early, but all the same I was there again at five to tell them 
goodbye. It was a clear, black morning, encrusted with stars; the thermometer 
on the porch of Commons had sunk to zero. The taxi, idling in a cloud of 
fume, was already waiting in front. The driver had just slammed the lid on a 
trunkful of luggage and Charles and Camilla were locking the door behind 
them. They were too worried and preoccupied to take much pleasure at my 
presence. Both of them were nervous travelers: their parents had been killed 
in a car accident, on a weekend drive up to Washington, and they were edgy 
for days before they had to go anywhere themselves. 


They were running late, as well. Charles put down his suitcase to shake my 
hand. 'Merry Christmas, Richard. You will write, won't you?’ he said, then ran 
down the walk to the cab. Camilla — struggling with two enormous carpetbags 
— dropped them both in the snow and said: 'Dammit, we'll never get all this 
luggage on the train. 


She was breathing hard, and deep circles of red burned high on her bright 
cheeks; in all my life I had never seen anyone so maddeningly beautiful as she 
was at that moment. I stood blinking stupidly at her, the blood pounding in my 
veins, and my carefully I rehearsed plans for a goodbye kiss forgotten, when 
unexpectedly she flew up and threw her arms around me. Her hoarse breath ™ 
was loud in my ear and her cheek was like ice when she put it against mine a 
moment later; when I took her gloved hand, I felt the quick pulse of her 
slender wrist beneath my thumbs. 


The taxi honked and Charles put his head out the window. 
‘Come on,' he shouted. 


I carried her bags down to the sidewalk and stood under the street lamp as 
they pulled away. They were turned around in the back seat and waving to me 
through the rear window and I stood watching them, and the ghost of my own 
distorted reflection receding in the curve of the dark glass, until the cab turned 
a corner and disappeared. 


I stood in the deserted street until 1 could no longer hear the sound of the 
motor, only the hiss of the powdery snow that the wind kicked up in little 
eddies on the ground. Then I started back to campus, hands deep in pockets 
and the crunch of my feet unbearably loud. The dorms were black and silent, 
and the big parking lot behind the tennis court was empty except for a few 
faculty cars and a lone green truck from Maintenance. In my dorm the 
hallways were littered with shoe boxes and coat hangers, doors ajar, 
everything dark and quiet as the grave. I was as depressed as I have ever been 
in my life. I pulled down the shades and lay down on my unmade bed and 
went back to sleep. 


I had so few belongings it was possible to take them in one trip. 


When I woke again, around noon, I packed my two suitcases and, dropping 
my key off at the security booth, hauled them down the deserted, snowy road 
into town and to the address the hippie had given me over the telephone. 


It was a longer walk than I'd expected, and it soon took me off the main road 
and through some particularly desolate country near Mount Cataract. My way 
ran parallel to a rapid, shallow river — the Battenkill — spanned by covered 
bridges here and there It would have been a pleasant, if demanding walk even 
in the summertime but in December, in two feet of snow and with two heavy 
suitcases to carry, I found myself wondering if I would make it at all. My toes 
and fingers were cramped with cold, and more than once I had to stop to rest, 
but gradually the countryside began to look less and less deserted and finally 
the road came out where I had been told it would: Prospect Street in East 


Hampden. 


It was a part of town I had never seen, and worlds away from the part 1 knew 
— maple trees and clapboard storefronts, village green and courthouse clock. 
This Hampden was a bombed-out expanse of water towers, rusted railroad 
tracks, sagging warehouses and factories with the doors boarded up and the 
windows broken out. All of it looked as though it had stood abandoned since 
the Depression, except for a seedy little bar at the end of the street, which, 
judging from the scrum of trucks out front, was doing a good brisk business, 
even this early in the afternoon. 


Strings of Christmas lights and plastic holly hung above the neon beer lights; 
glancing inside, I saw a line of men in flannel shirts at the bar, all with shot 
glasses or beers before them, and — towards the back — a younger set running 
more to baseball caps and fat clustered around a pool table. I stood outside the 
red, padded-vinyl door and looked in through the porthole at the top for an 
instant longer. Should I go in and ask directions, have a drink, get warm? I 
decided I should, and my hand was on the greasy brass door handle when I 
saw the name of the place in the window: Boulder Tap. I had heard of the 
Boulder Tap from the local news. It was the epicenter of what little crime 
there was in Hampden — knifings, rapes, never a single witness. It was not a 
llong its course. There were few houses, and even those grim, terrifying 
house trailers one frequently sees in the harkwoods of Vermont, with 
tremendous piles of wood to the side and black smoke pouring out the 
stovepipes, were few and far between. 


There were no cars at all, except for the occasional derelict vehicle propped 
on cinderblocks in someone's front yard. the type of place where you'd want 
to stop in alone for a drink if you were a lost college bov from up on the hill. j 
O J L But it wasn't so hard to find where the hippie lived, after all. 


One of the warehouses, right on the river, was painted bright purple. 


The hippie looked angry, as though I'd woken him up, when he finally came 
to the door. ‘Just let yourself in next time, man,' he said sullenly. He was a 
short fat man with a sweat-stained T-shirt and a red beard, who looked as if 
he'd spent many fine evenings with his friends around the pool table at the 
Boulder Tap. He pointed out the room where I was to live, at the top of a 
flight of iron stairs (no railing, naturally), and disappeared without a word. 


I found myself in a cavernous, dusty room with a plank floor and high, 
exposed rafters. Besides a broken dresser, and a high chair standing in the 
corner, it was completely unfurnished except for a lawn mower, a rusted oil 
drum, and a trestle table which was scattered with sandpaper and carpentry 
tools and a few curved pieces of wood which were perhaps the exoskeletons 


of mandolins. Sawdust, nails, food wrappers and cigarette butts, Playboy 
magazines from the 19705 littered the floor; the many paned windows were 
furry with frost and grime. 


I let one suitcase and then the other fall from my numb hands; for a moment 
my mind was numb, too, agreeably registering these impressions without 
comment. Then, all at once, I became aware of an overwhelming roaring, 
rushing noise. I went over and looked out the back windows behind the trestle 
table and was startled to see an expanse of water, hardly three feet below. 


Farther down, I could see it pounding over a dam, and the spray flying. As I 
tried to clear a circle on the window with my hand so I could see better, I 
noticed that my breath was still white, even then, indoors. 


Suddenly, something that I can only describe as an icy blast swept over me, 
and I looked up. There was a large hole in the roof; I saw blue sky, a swift 
cloud moving from left to right, through the jagged black edge. Below it was a 
thin powdery dusting of snow, stenciled perfectly on the wooden floor in the 
shape of the hole above it, and undisturbed except for the sharp line of a 
solitary footprint, my own. 


A good many people asked me later if I had realized what a dangerous thing 
this was, attempting to live in an unheated building in upstate Vermont during 
the coldest months of the year; and to be frank, I hadn't. In the back of my 
mind were the stories I'd heard, of drunks, of old people, of careless skiers 
freezing to death, but for some reason none of this seemed to apply to me. My 
quarters were uncomfortable, certainly, they were foully dirty and bitterly 
cold; but it never occurred to me that they were actually unsafe. Other 
students had lived there; the hippie lived there himself; a receptionist at the 
Student Referral Office had told me about it. What I didn't know was that the 
hippie's own quarters were properly heated, and that the students who had 
lived there in the past had come there well armed with space heaters and 
electric blankets. The hole in the roof, moreover, was a recent development, 
unknown to the Student Referral Office. I suppose anyone who knew the 
whole story would have warned me off, but the fact was, nobody did know. I 
was so embarrassed at having such living quarters that I had told no one 
where I was staying, not even Dr Roland; the only person who knew all was 
the hippie, and he was supremely unconcerned with anyone's welfare but his 
own. 


Early in the morning, while it was still dark, I would wake up in my blankets 
on the floor (I slept in two or three sweaters, long underwear, wool trousers 
and overcoat) and walk just as I was to Dr Roland's office. It was a long walk 
and, if it was snowing or the wind was up, sometimes a harrowing one. I 
would arrive at Commons, chilled and exhausted, just as the janitor was 


unlocking the building for the day. I would then go downstairs and shave and 
shower in the cellar, in a disused and rather sinister-looking room — white 
tiles, exposed piping, a drain in the middle of the floor — that had been part of 
a makeshift infirmary during World War II. The janitors used the taps to fill 
the wash buckets, so the water was still on and there was even a gas heater; I 
kept a razor, soap, an inconspicuously folded towel towards the back of one of 
the empty, glass-fronted cabinets. Then I would go make myself a can of soup 
and some instant coffee on the hot plate in the Social Science office, and by 
the time Dr Roland and the secretaries arrived, I already had quite a start on 
the day's work. 


Dr Roland, accustomed as he was by this time to my truancy and my 
frequent excuses and my failure to complete tasks by the deadline, was 
startled and rather suspicious of this abrupt spurt of industry. He praised my 
work, questioned me closely; on several occasions I heard him in the hall 
discussing my metamorphosis with Dr Cabrini, the head of the psychology 
department, the only other teacher in the building who hadn't left for the 
winter. At the first, no doubt, he thought it was all some new trick of mine. 
But as the weeks rolled by and each new day of enthusiastic labor added 
another gold star to my shining record he began to believe: timidly at first but 
at last triumphantly. 


Around the first of February he even gave me a raise. Perhaps he was hoping 
in his Behavioralist way that this would spur me to even greater heights of 
motivation. He came to regret this mistake, however, when the winter term 
ended and I went back to my comfortable little room in Monmouth House and 
all my old incompetent ways. 


I worked as late at Dr Roland's as I decently could and then went to the 
snack bar in Commons for dinner. On certain fortunate nights there were even 
places to go afterwards, and I scanned the bulletin boards eagerly for these 
meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous, these performances of Brigadoon by the 
local high school. But usually there was nothing at all, and Commons closed 
at seven, and I was left my long walk home in the snow and dark. 


The cold in the warehouse was like nothing I've known before or since. I 
suppose if I'd had any sense I'd have gone out and bought an electric heater, 
but only four months before I had come from one of the warmest climates in 
America and I had only the dimmest awareness that such appliances existed. 
It never occurred to me that half the population of Vermont wasn't 
experiencing pretty much what I put myself through every night — bone- 
cracking cold that made my joints ache, cold so relentless I felt it in my 
dreams: ice floes, lost expeditions, the lights of search planes swinging over 
whitecaps as I floundered alone in black Arctic seas. In the morning, when I 
woke, I was as stiff and sore as if I'd been beaten. I thought it was because I 


was sleeping on the floor. Only later did I realize that the true cause of this 
malady was hard, merciless shivering, my muscles contracting as 
mechanically as if by electric impulse, all night long, every night. 


Amazingly, the hippie, whose name was Leo, was quite angry that I didn't 
spend more time carving mandolin struts or warping boards or whatever it 
was I was supposed to be doing up there. 


"You're taking advantage, man,’ he would say threateningly whenever he 
happened to see me. He had some idea that I had studied instrument building 
and was in fact able to do all sorts of complex, technical work, though I had 
never told him any such thing. 'Yes, you did,’ he said, when I pled my 
ignorance. 'You did. You said you lived in the Blue Ridge Mountains one 
summer and made dulcimers. In Kentucky.’ 


I had nothing to say to this. I am not unused to being confronted with my 
own lies, but those of others never fail to throw me for a loop. I could only 
deny it and say, quite honestly, that I didn't even know. what a dulcimer was. 
‘Carve pegs,’ he said insolently. 'Sweep up.’ To which I replied, in so many 
words, that I could hardly carve pegs in rooms too cold for me to take my 
gloves off. 'Cut the fingertips off them, man,’ said Leo, unperturbed. These 
occasional collarings in the front hall were as far as my contact with him 
went. It eventually became evident to me that Leo, for all his professed love 
for mandolins, never actually set foot in the workshop and had apparently not 
done so for months before I came to live there. I began to wonder if perhaps 
he was even unaware of the hole in the roof; one day I made so bold as to 
mention it to him. 'I thought that was one of the things you could fix around 
the place,’ he said. It stands as a testimony to my misery that one Sunday I 
actually attempted to do this, with a few odd scraps of mandolin wood that I 
found around, and nearly lost my life in the attempt; the grade of the roof was 
wickedly sharp and I lost my balance and nearly fell into the dam, catching 
myself only at the last moment on a length of tin drainpipe which, mercifully, 
held. I managed with effort to save myself — my hands were cut on the rusted 
tin, and I had to get a tetanus shot — but Leo's hammer and saw and the pieces 
of mandolin wood tumbled into the dam. The tools all sank and Leo probably 
does not know to this day that they are missing, but unfortunately the 
mandolin pieces floated and managed to lodge themselves in a cluster at the 
top of the spillway, right outside Leo's bedroom window. Of course he had 
plenty to say about this, and about college kids who didn't care about other 
people's things, and everybody trying to rip him off all the time. 


Christmas came and went without notice, except that with no work and 
everything closed there was no place to go to get warm except, for a few 
hours, to church. I came home afterwards and wrapped myself in my blanket 
and rocked back and forth, ice in my very bones, and thought of all the sunny 


Christmases of my childhood — oranges, bikes and Hula Hoops, green tinsel 
sparkling in the heat. 


Mail arrived occasionally, in care of Hampden College. Francis sent me a 
six-page letter about how bored he felt, and how sick he was, and virtually 
everything he'd had to eat since I'd seen him last. The twins, bless them, sent 
boxes of cookies their erandmother had made and letters written in alternating 
inks black for Charles, red for Camilla. Around the second week of January I 
got a postcard from Rome, no return address. It was a photograph of the 
Primaporta Augustus; beside it, Bunny had drawn a surprisingly deft cartoon 
of himself and Henry in Roman dress (togas, little round eyeglasses) squinting 
off curiously in the direction indicated by the statue's outstretched arm. 
(Caesar Augustus was Bunny's hero; he had embarrassed us all by cheering 
loudly at the mention of his name during the reading of the Bethlehem story 
from Luke 2 at the literature division's Christmas party. 'Well, what of it,’ he 
said, when we tried to shush him. 


‘All the world shoulda been taxed.') 


I still have this postcard. Characteristically, the writing is in pencil; over the 
years it's become a bit smudged but it's still quite legible. There is no 
signature, but there is no mistaking the authorship: Richard old Man are you 
Frozen? it is quite warm here. We live in a Penscione (sp.) I ordered Conche 
by mistake yesterday in a restaurant it was awfiil but Henry ate it. Everybody 
here is a damn Catholic. Arrivaderci see you soon. 


Francis and the twins had asked me, rather insistently, my address in 
Hampden. 'Where are you living?’ said Charles in black ink. "Yes, where?’ 
echoed Camilla in red. (She used a particular morocco shade of ink that to me, 
missing her terribly, brought back in a rush of color all the thin, cheerful 
hoarseness of her voice.) As I had no address to give them, I ignored their 
questions and padded my replies with broad references to snow, and beauty, 
and solitude. I often thought how peculiar my life must look to someone 
reading those letters, far away. The existence they described was detached and 
impersonal, all embracing yet indefinite, with large blanks that rose to halt the 
reader at every turn; with a few changes of date and circumstance they could 
have been as easily from the Gautama as myself. 


I wrote these letters in the mornings before work, in the library, during my 
sessions of prolonged loitering in Commons, where I remained every evening 
until asked to leave by the janitor. It seemed my whole life was composed of 
these disjointed fractions of time, hanging around in one public place and then 
another, as if I were waiting for trains that never came. And, like one of those 
ghosts who are said to linger around depots late at night, asking passersby for 
the timetable of the Midnight Express that derailed twenty years before, I 


wandered from light to light until that dreaded hour when all the doors closed 
and, stepping from the world of warmth and people and conversation 
overheard, I felt the old familiar cold twist through my bones again and then it 
was all forgotten, the warmth, the lights; I had never been warm in my life, 
ever. 


I became expert at making myself invisible. I could linger two hours over a 
coffee, four over a meal, and hardly be noticed by the waitress. Though the 
janitors in Commons rousted me every night at closing time, I doubt they ever 
realized they spoke to the same boy twice. Sunday afternoons, my cloak of 
invisibility around my shoulders, I would sit in the infirmary for sometimes 
six hours at a time, placidly reading copies of Yankee magazine ('Clamming 
on Cuttyhunk’) or Reader's Digest (Ten Ways to Help That Aching Back’), 
my presence unremarked by receptionist, physician, and fellow sufferer alike. 


But, like the Invisible Man in H. G. Wells, I discovered that my gift had its 
price, which took the form of, in my case as in his, a sort of mental darkness. 
It seemed that people failed to meet my eye, made as if to walk through me; 
my superstitions began to transform themselves into something like mania. I 
became convinced that it was only a matter of time before one of the rickety 
iron steps that led to my room gave and I would fall and break my neck or, 
worse, a leg; I'd freeze or starve before Leo would assist me. Because one 
day, when I'd climbed the stairs successfully and without fear, I'd had an old 
Brian Eno song running through my head (‘In New Delhi,'And Hong Kong,’ 
They all know that it won't be long...'), I now had to sing it to myself each 
trip up or down the stairs. 


And each time I crossed the footbridge over the river, twice a day, I had to 
stop and scoop around in the coffee-colored snow at the road's edge until I 
found a decent-sized rock. I would then lean over the icy railing and drop it 
into the rapid current that bubbled over the speckled dinosaur eggs of granite 
which made up its bed — a gift to the river-god, maybe, for safe crossing, or 
perhaps some attempt to prove to it that I, though invisible, did exist. The 
water ran so shallow and clear in places that sometimes I heard the dropped 
stone click as it hit the bed. Both hands on the icy rail, staring down at the 
water as it dashed white against the boulders, boiled thinly over the polished 
stones, I wondered what it would be like to fall and break my head open on 
one of those bright rocks: a wicked crack, a sudden limpness, then veins of 
red marbling the glassy water. 


If I threw myself off, I thought, who would find me in all that white silence? 
Might the river beat me downstream over the rocks until it spat me out in the 
quiet waters, down behind the dye factory, where some lady would catch me 
in the beam of her headlights when she pulled out of the parking lot at five in 
the afternoon? Or would I, like the pieces of Leo's mandolin, lodge stubbornly 


in some quiet place behind a boulder and wait, my clothes washing about me, 
for spring? 


This was, I should say, about the third week in January. The thermometer 
was dropping; my life, which before had been only solitary and miserable, 
became unbearable. Every day, in a daze, I walked to and from work, 
sometimes during weather that was ten or twenty below, sometimes during 
storms so heavy that all I could see was white, and the only way I made it 
home at all was by keeping close to the guard rail on the side of the road. 


Once home, I wrapped myself in my dirty blankets and fell on the floor like a 
dead man. All my moments which were not consumed with efforts to escape 
the cold were absorbed with morbid Poe-like fancies. One night, in a dream, I 
saw my own corpse, hair stiff with ice and eyes wide open. 


I was at Dr Roland's office every morning like clockwork. He, an alleged 
psychologist, noticed not one of the Ten Warning Signs of Nervous Collapse 
or whatever it was that he was educated to see, and qualified to teach. Instead, 
he took advantage of my silence to talk to himself about football, and dogs he 
had had as a boy. The rare remarks he addressed to me were cryptic and 
incomprehensible. He asked, for example, since I was in the Drama 
department, why hadn't I been in any plays? "What's wrong? Are you shy, 
boy? Show them what you're made of Another time he told me, in an offhand 
manner, that when he was at Brown he had roomed with the boy who lived 
down the hall from him. One day, he said he didn't know my friend was in 
Hampden for the winter. 


'I don't have any friends here for the winter,’ I said, and I didn't. 


"You shouldn't push your friends away like that. The best friends you'll ever 
have are the ones you're making right now. I know you don't believe me, but 
they start to fall away when you get to be my age.’ 


When I walked home at night, things got white around the edges and it 
seemed I had no past, no memories, that I had been on this exact stretch of 
luminous, hissing road forever. 


I don't know what exactly was wrong with me. The doctors said it was 
chronic hypothermia, with bad diet and a mild case of pneumonia on top of it; 
but I don't know if that accounts for all the hallucinations and mental 
confusion. At the time I wasn't even aware I was sick: any symptom, any 
fever or pain, was drowned by the clamor of my more immediate miseries. 


For I was in a bad fix. It was the coldest January on record for twenty-five 
years. I was terrified of freezing to death but there was absolutely nowhere I 
could go. I suppose I might've asked Dr Roland if I could stay in the 


apartment he shared with his girlfriend, but the embarrassment of that was 
such that death, to me, seemed preferable. I knew no one else, even slightly, 
and short of knocking on the doors of strangers there was little I could do. 
One bitter night I tried to call my parents from the pay phone outside the 
Boulder Tap; sleet was falling and I was shivering so violently I could hardly 
get the coins in the slot. 


Although I had some desperate, half-baked hope that they might send money 
or a plane ticket, I didn't know what I wanted them to say to me; I think I had 
some idea that I, standing in the sleet and winds of Prospect Street, would feel 
better simply by hearing the voices of people far away, in a warm place. But 
when my father picked up the telephone on the sixth or seventh ring, his 
voice, beery and irritated, gave me a hard, dry feeling in my throat and I hung 


up. 


Dr Roland mentioned my imaginary friend again. He'd seen him uptown this 
time, walking on the square late at night as he was driving home. 


'I told you I don't have any friends here,' I said. 

"You know who I'm talking about. Great big boy. Wears glasses.’ 
Someone who looked like Henry? Bunny? 'You must be mistaken,’ 
I said. 


The temperature plummeted so low that I was forced to spend a few nights at 
the Catamount Motel. I was the only person in the place, besides the snaggle- 
toothed old man who ran it; he was in the room next to mine and kept me 
awake with his loud hacking and spitting. There was no lock on my door, only 
the antique sort that can be picked with a hairpin; on the third night I woke 
from a bad dream (nightmare stairwell, steps all different heights and widths; 
a man going down ahead of me, really fast) to hear a faint, clicking noise. I sat 
up in bed and, to my horror, saw my doorknob turning stealthily in the 
moonlight: 'Who's there?’ I said loudly, and it stopped. I lay awake in the dark 
for a long time. The next morning, I left, preferring a quieter death at Leo's to 
being murdered in my bed. 


A terrible storm came around the first of February, bringing with it downed 
power lines, stranded motorists, and, for me, a bout of hallucinations. Voices 
spoke to me in the roar of the water, in the hissing snow: 'Lie down,’ they 
whispered, and 'Turn left. You'll be sorry if you don't.' My typewriter was by 
the window of Dr Roland's office. Late one afternoon, as it was getting dark, I 
looked down into the empty courtyard and was startled to see that a dark, 
motionless figure had materialized under the lamp, standing with its hands in 
the pockets of its dark overcoat and looking up at my window. It was 


shadowy and heavy snow was falling: 'Henry?' I said, and squeezed my eyes 
shut until I saw stars. When I opened them again, I saw nothing but snow 
whirling in the bright cone of emptiness beneath the light. 


At night I lay shivering on the floor, watching the illuminated snowflakes sift 
in a column through the hole in the ceiling. On the margin of stupefaction, as I 
was sliding off the steep roof of unconsciousness, something would tell me at 
the last instant that if I went to sleep I might never wake: with a struggle I 
would force my eyes open and all of a sudden the column of snow, standing 
bright and tall in its dark corner, would appear to me in its true whispering, 
smiling menace, an airy angel of death. But I was too tired to care; even as I 
looked at it I would feel my grasp slackening, and before I knew it I had 
tumbled down the slanted edge, and into the dark abyss of sleep. 


Time was beginning to blur. I still dragged myself to the office, but only 
because it was warm there, and I somehow performed the simple tasks that I 
had to do, but I honestly do not know J how much longer I would have been 
able to keep this up had not a very surprising thing happened. 


I'll never forget this night as long as I live. It was Friday, and Dr Roland was 
going to be out of town until the following Wednesday. For me, that meant 
four days in the warehouse, and even in my clouded state it was clear I might 
freeze to death for real. 


When Commons closed I started for home. The snow was deep, and before 
long my legs to the knees were prickling and numb. By the time the road 
came around into East Hampden I was wondering seriously if I could make it 
to the warehouse, and what I would do when I got there. Everything in East 
Hampden was dark and deserted, even the Boulder Tap; the only light for 
miles around seemed to be the light shimmering around the pay phone in 
front. I made my way towards it as though it were a mirage in the desert. I had 
about thirty dollars in my pocket, more than enough to call a taxi to take me to 
the Catamount Motel, to a nasty little room with an unlocked door and 
whatever else might await me there. 


My voice was slurred and the operator wouldn't give me the number of a taxi 
company. 'You have to give me the name of a specific taxi service,’ she said. 
"We're not allowed to ' 


'I don't know the name of a specific taxi service,’ I said thickly. 
‘There's not a phone book here.’ 
Tm sorry, sir, but we're not allowed to ' 


‘Red Top?' I said desperately, trying to guess at names, make them up, 


anything. 'Yellow Top? Town Taxi? Checker?’ 


Finally I guess I got one right, or maybe she just felt sorry for me. There was 
a click, and a mechanical voice came on and gave me a number. I dialed it 
quickly so I wouldn't forget, so quickly that I got it wrong and lost my quarter. 


I had one more quarter in my pocket; it was my last one. I took off my glove 
and groped in my pocket with my numbed fingers. Finally I found it, and I 
had it in my hand and was about to bring it up to the slot, when suddenly it 
slipped from my fingers and I pitched forward after it, hitting my forehead on 
the sharp corner of the metal tray beneath the phone. 


I lay face down in the snow for a few minutes. There was a rushing noise in 
my ears; in falling, I had grabbed for the phone and knocked it off the hook, 
and the busy signal the receiver made as it swung back and forth sounded as if 
it were coming from a long way off. 


I managed to get up on all fours. Staring at the place where my head had 
been, I saw a dark spot on the snow. When I touched my forehead with my 
ungloved hand the fingers came away red. The quarter was gone; besides, I 
had forgotten the number. I would have to come back later, when the Boulder 
Tap was open and I could get change. Somehow I struggled to my feet, 
leaving the black receiver dangling from its cord. 


I made it up the stairs half walking, half on my hands and knees. Blood was 
trickling down my forehead. At the landing I stopped to rest and felt my 
surroundings slide out of focus: static, between stations, everything snowy for 
a moment or two before the black lines wavered and the picture snapped back; 
not quite clear, but recognizable. Jerky camera, nightmare commercial. 


Leo's Mandolin Warehouse. Last stop, down by the river. Low rates. 
Remember us, too, for all your meat-locker needs. 


I pushed the workshop door open with my shoulder and began to fumble for 
the light switch when suddenly I saw something by the window that made me 
reel with shock. A figure in a long black overcoat was standing motionless 
across the room by the windows, hands clasped behind the back; near one of 
the hands I saw the tiny glow of a cigarette coal. 


The lights came on with a crackle and a hum. The shadowy figure, now solid 
and visible, turned around. It was Henry. He seemed on the verge of making 
some joking remark, but when he saw me his eyes got wide and his mouth fell 
open into a small round o. 


We stood staring at each other across the room for a moment or two. 


‘Henry?’ I said at last, my voice scarcely more than a whisper. 


He let the cigarette fall from his fingers and took a step towards me. It really 
was him — damp, ruddy cheeks, snow on the shoulders of his overcoat. 'Good 
God, Richard,' he said, 'what's happened to you?’ 


It was as much surprise as I ever saw him show. I stood where I was, staring, 
unbalanced. Things had got too bright. I reached for the door frame, and the 
next thing I knew I was falling, and Henry had jumped forward to catch me. 


He eased me onto the floor and took off his coat and spread it over me like a 
blanket. I squinted up at him and wiped my mouth with the back of my hand. 
"Where did you come from?’ 


I said. 


'I left Italy early.’ He was brushing the hair back from my forehead, trying to 
get a look at my cut. I saw blood on his fingertips. 


‘Some little place I've got here, huh?' I said, and laughed. 


He glanced up at the hole in the ceiling. 'Yes,' he said brusquely. ‘Like the 
Pantheon.’ Then he bent to look at my head again. 


I remember being in Henry's car, and lights and people bending over me, and 
having to sit up when I didn't want to, and I also remember someone trying to 
take my blood, and me complaining sort of feebly about it; but the first thing I 
remember with any clarity was sitting up and finding myself in a dim, white 
room, lying in a hospital bed with an IV in my arm. 


Henry was sitting in a chair by my bed, reading by the table lamp. He put 
down his book when he saw me stir. "Your cut wasn't serious,’ he said. 'It was 
very clean and shallow. They gave you a few stitches.’ 


‘Am I in the infirmary?’ 
"You're in Montpelier. I brought you to the hospital.’ 
"What's this IV for?’ 


'They say you have pneumonia. Would you like something to read?’ he said 
courteously. 


"No thank you. What time is it?’ 


‘One in the morning.’ 


"But I thought you were in Rome.' 


'I came back about two weeks ago. If you want to go back to sleep I'll call 
the nurse to give you a shot.’ 


"No thanks. Why haven't I seen you before now?’ 


"Because I didn't know where you lived. The only address I had for you was 
in care of the college. This afternoon I asked around at the offices. By the 
way,’ he said, 'what's the name of the town where your parents live?’ 


‘Piano. Why?’ 
'I thought you might want me to call them.’ 


‘Don't bother,’ I said, sinking back into my bed. The IV was like ice in my 
veins. "Tell me about Rome.’ 


‘All right,’ he said, and he began to talk very quietly about the lovely 
Etruscan terracottas in the Villa Giulia, and the lily pools and the fountains in 
the nymphaeum outside it; about the Villa Borghese and the Colosseum, the 
view from the Palatine Hill early in the morning, and how beautiful the Baths 
of Caracalla must have been in Roman times, with the marbles and the 
libraries and the big circular calidarium, and the frigidarium, with its great 
empty pool, that was there even now, and probably a lot of other things 
besides but I don't remember because I fell asleep. 


I was in the hospital for four nights. Henry stayed with me almost the whole 
time, bringing me sodas when I asked for them, and a razor and a toothbrush, 
and a pair of his own pajamas — silky Egyptian cotton, cream-colored and 
heavenly soft, with HMW (M for Marchbanks) embroidered in tiny scarlet 
letters on the pocket. He also brought me pencils and paper, for which I had 
little use but which The suppose he would have been lost without, and a great 
many books, half of which were in languages I couldn't read and the other half 
of which might as well have been. One night — head aching from Hegel —1 
asked him to bring me a magazine; he looked rather startled, and when he 
came back it was with a trade journal (Pharmacology Update) he had found in 
the lounge. We talked hardly at all. Most of the time he read, with a 
concentration that astonished me; six hours at a stretch, scarcely glancing up. 
He paid me almost no attention. 


But he stayed up with me on the bad nights, when I had a hard time 
breathing and my lungs hurt so I couldn't sleep; and once, when the nurse on 
duty was three hours late with my medicine, he followed her expressionless 
into the hall and there delivered, in his subdued monotone, such a tense and 
eloquent reprimand that the nurse (a contemptuous, hard-bitten woman, with 


dyed hair like an aging waitress, and a sour word for everyone) was somewhat 
mollified; and afterwards she — who ripped off the bandages around my IV 
with such callousness, and poked me black and blue in her desultory search 
for veins — was much gentler in her handling of me, and once, while taking 
my temperature, even called me ‘hon.’ 


The emergency room doctor told me that Henry had saved my life. This was 
a dramatic and gratifying thing to hear — and one which I repeated to a 
number of people — but secretly I thought it was an exaggeration. In 
subsequent years, however, I've come to feel that he might well have been 
right. When I was younger I thought that I was immortal. And though I 
bounced back quickly, in a short-term sense, in another I never really quite 
got over that winter. I've had problems with my lungs ever since, and my 
bones ache at the slightest chill, and I catch cold easily now, whereas I never 
used to. 


I told Henry what the doctor had said. He was displeased. 


Frowning, he made some curt remark — actually, I'm surprised I've forgotten 
it, I was so embarrassed — and I never mentioned it again. I think he did save 
me, though. And someplace, if there is a place where lists are kept, and credit 
given, I am sure there is a gold star by his name. 


But I am getting sentimental. Sometimes, when I think about these things, I 
do. 


On Monday morning I was able to leave at last, with a bottle of antibiotics 
and an arm full of pinpricks. They insisted on pushing me to Henry's car in a 
wheelchair, though I was perfectly able to walk and humiliated at being rolled 
out like a parcel. 


"Take me to the Catamount Motel,’ 1 told him as we pulled into Hampden. 
'No,' he said. "You're coming to stay with me.' 


Henry lived on the first floor of an old house on Water Street, in North 
Hampden, just around the block from Charles and Camilla's and closer to the 
river. He didn't like to have people over and I had been there only once, and 
then only for a minute or two. It was much larger than Charles and Camilla's 
apartment, and a good deal emptier. The rooms were big and anonymous, 
with wide-plank floors and no curtains on the windows and plaster walls 
painted white. The furniture, while obviously good, was scarred and plain and 
there wasn't much of it. The whole place had a ghostly, unoccupied look; and 
some of the rooms had nothing in them at all. I had been told by the twins that 
Henry disliked electric lights, and here and there I saw kerosene lamps in the 
windowsills. 


His bedroom, where I was to stay, had been closed off rather pointedly 
during my previous visit. In it were Henry's books — not as many as you might 
think — and a single bed, and very little else, except a closet with a large, 
conspicuous padlock. Tacked on the closet door was a black and white picture 
from an old magazine — Life, it said, 1945. It was of Vivien Leigh and, 
surprisingly, a much younger Julian. They were at a cocktail party, I glasses in 
hand; he was whispering something in her ear, and she was laughing. 


"Where was that taken?’ I said. 


'I don't know. Julian says he can't remember. Every now and then one runs 
across a photograph of him in an old magazine.’ 


'Why?' 

'He used to know a lot of people.' 
'Who?' 

'Most of them are dead now.' 
'Who?' 


T really don't know, Richard.' Then, relenting: 'I've seen pictures of him with 
the Sitwells. And The. S. Eliot. Also — there's rather a funny one of him with 
that actress — I can't remember her name. She's dead now.' He thought for a 
minute. 'She was blond,' he said. 'I think she was married to a baseball player.’ 


"Marilyn Monroe?' 
"Maybe. It wasn't a very good picture. Only newsprint.’ 


Some time during the past three days, Henry had gone over and moved my 
things from Leo's. My suitcases stood at the foot of the bed. 


'I don't want to take your bed, Henry,' I said. 'Where are you going to sleep?' 


'One of the back rooms has a bed that folds out from the wall,' said Henry. 'I 
can't think what they're called. I've never slept in it before.’ 


"Then why don't you let me sleep there?’ 


"No. I am rather curious to see what it is like. Besides, I think it's good to 
change the place where one sleeps from time to time. 


I believe it gives one more interesting dreams." 


I was only planning on spending a few days with Henry — I was back at work 
for Dr Roland the following Monday — but I ended up staying until school 
started again. I couldn't understand why Bunny had said he was hard to live 
with. He was the best roommate I've ever had, quiet and neat, and usually off 
in his own part of the house. Much of the time he was gone when I got home 
from work; he never told me where he went, and I never asked. But 
sometimes when I got home he would have made dinner — he wasn't a fancy 
cook like Francis and only made plain things, broiled chickens and baked 
potatoes, bachelor food — and we would sit at the card table in the kitchen and 
eat it and talk. 


I had learned better by then than to pry into his affairs, but one night, when 
my curiosity had got the better of me, I asked him: 'Is Bunny still in Rome?! 


It was several moments before he answered. 'I suppose so,' he said, putting 
down his fork. 'He was there when I left.’ 


"Why didn't he come back with you?’ 
'I don't think he wanted to leave. I'd paid the rent through February. 
"He stuck you with the rent?’ 


Henry took another bite of his food. 'Frankly,' he said, after he had chewed 
and swallowed, ‘no matter what Bunny tells you to the contrary, he hasn't a 
cent and neither does his father.' 


'I thought his parents were well off,’ I said, jarred. 


'I wouldn't say that,’ said Henry calmly. "They may have had money once, 
but if so they spent it long ago. That terrible house of theirs must have cost a 
fortune, and they make a big show of yacht clubs and country clubs and 
sending their sons to expensive schools, but that's got them in debt to the 
eyebrows. They may look wealthy, but they haven't a dime. I expect Mr 
Corcoran is about bankrupt.' 


‘Bunny seems to live pretty well.’ 


‘Bunny's never had a cent of pocket money the entire time I've known him,' 
said Henry tartly. ‘And he has expensive tastes. 


That is unfortunate.’ 
We resumed eating in silence. 


‘If I were Mr Corcoran,’ said Henry after a long while, 'I would have set 


Bunny up in business or had him learn a trade after high school. Bunny has no 
business being in college. He couldn't even read until he was about ten years 
old.’ 


'He draws well,’ I said. 


'I think so, too. He certainly has no gift for scholarship. They should've 
apprenticed him to a painter when he was young instead of sending him to all 
those expensive schools for learning disabilities.’ 


"He sent me a very good cartoon of you and he standing by a statue of Caesar 
Augustus.’ 


Henry made a sharp, exasperated sound. 'That was in the Vatican,’ he said. 
"All day long he made loud remarks about Dagos and Catholics. 


‘At least he doesn't speak Italian. 


'He spoke it well enough to order the most expensive thing on the menu 
every time we went to a restaurant,’ said Henry curtly, and I thought it wise to 
change the subject and did. 


On the Saturday before school was to begin, I was lying on Henry's bed 
reading a book. Henry had been gone since before I woke up. Suddenly I 
heard a loud banging at the front door. 


Thinking Henry had forgotten his key, I went to let him in. 


It was Bunny. He was wearing sunglasses and — in contrast to the shapeless, 
tweedy rags he generally wore — a sharp and very new Italian suit. He had also 
gained about ten or twenty pounds. 


He seemed surprised to see me. 


"Well, hello there, Richard,’ he said, shaking my hand heartily. 'Buenos dias. 
Good to see ya. Didn't see the car out front but just got into town and thought 
I'd stop by anyway. Where's the man of the house?’ 


"He's not home. 

"Then what are you doing? Breaking and entering?’ 

Tve been staying here for a while. I got your postcard.’ 
‘Staying here?' he said, looking at me in a peculiar way. 'Why?' 


I was surprised he didn't know. 'I was sick,' I said, and I explained a little of 


what had happened. 
‘Hmnpf,' said Bunny. 
‘Do you want some coffee?’ 


We walked through the bedroom to get to the kitchen. "Looks like you've 
made quite a little home for yourself,’ he said brusquely, looking at my 
belongings on the night table and my suitcases on the floor. 'American coffee 
all you have?’ 


"What do you mean? Folger's?’ 
"No espresso, I mean?’ 
‘Oh. No. Sorry.’ 


Tm an espresso man myself,’ he said expansively. 'Drank it all the time over 
in Italy. They have all kind of little places where you sit around and do that, 
you know. ' 


T've heard.’ 


He took off his sunglasses and sat down at the table. "You don't have 
anything decent in there to eat, do you?’ he said, peering into the refrigerator 
as I opened the door to take out the cream. 'Haven't had my lunch yet.’ 


I opened the door wider so he could see. 
"That cheese'll be all right,’ he said. 


I cut some bread and made him a cheese sandwich, as he showed no 
inclination of getting up and making anything himself. 


Then I poured the coffee and sat down. 'Tell me about Rome,’ I said. 


'Gorgeous,' he said through his sandwich. ‘Eternal City. Lots of art. Churches 
every which way.’ 


"What'd you see?’ 


"Tons of things. Hard to remember all the names now, you know. Was 
speaking the lingo like a native by the time I left.’ 


‘Say something.’ 


He obliged, pinching his thumb and forefinger together and shaking them in 


the air for emphasis, like a French chef on a TV commercial. 
‘Sounds good,’ I said. "What does it mean?’ 


"Tt means «Waiter, bring me your local specialties,» he said, going back to 
his sandwich. 


I heard the slight sound of a key being turned in the lock and then I heard the 
door shut. Footsteps went quietly toward the other end of the apartment. 


Henry?’ bellowed Bun. "That you?’ 


The footsteps stopped. Then they came very rapidly towards the kitchen. 
When he got to the door he stood in it and stared down at Bunny, with no 
expression on his face. 'I thought that was you,’ he said. 


"Well, hello to you, too.’ Bunny, his mouth full, reared back in his chair. 
"How's the boy?’ 


‘Fine,’ said Henry. 'And you?’ 


IT hear you've been taking in the sick,’ said Bunny, winking at me. 
‘Conscience been hurting you? Thought you'd better rack up a couple good 
deeds?’ 


Henry didn't say anything, and I'm sure that at that moment he would have 
looked perfectly impassive to anyone who didn't know him, but I could tell he 
was quite agitated. He pulled out a chair and sat down. Then he got up again 
and went to pour himself a cup of coffee. 


Till have some more, thanks, if you don't mind,’ Bunny said. 


‘Good to be back in the good old U. S. of A. Hamburgers sizzling on an open 
grill and all that. Land of Opportunity. Long may she wave.’ 


"How long have you been here?’ 

"Flew into New York late last night.’ 

Tm sorry I wasn't here when you arrived.’ 
"Where were you?’ said Bunny suspiciously. 


‘At the market.’ This was a lie. I didn't know where he'd been but certainly he 
hadn't been grocery shopping for four hours. 


"Where are the groceries?’ said Bunny. Till help you bring them in.' 


T'm having them delivered.’ 

"The Food King has delivery?’ said Bunny, startled. 
'I didn't go to the Food King,’ said Henry. 
Uneasily, I got up and headed back to the bedroom. 


"No, no, don't go,’ said Henry, taking a long gulp of his coffee and putting the 
cup in the sink. ‘Bunny, I wish I'd known you were coming. But Richard and I 
have got to leave in a few minutes.’ 


"Why? 
'I have an appointment in town. 
"With a lawyer?’ Bunny laughed loudly at his own joke. 


"No. With the optometrist. That's why I came by,' he said to me. 'I hope you 
don't mind. They're going to put drops in my eyes and I can't see to drive.’ 


'No, sure,’ I said. 


I won't be long. You don't have to wait, just drop me off and come back to 
get me.’ 


Bunny walked us out to the car, our footsteps crunching in the snow. 'Ah, 
Vermont,’ he said, breathing deep and slapping his chest, like Oliver Douglas 
in the opening sequence of 'Green Acres.' 


‘Air does me good. So when d'ya think you'll be back, Henry?’ 


'I don't know,’ said Henry, handing me the keys and walking over to the 
passenger's side. 


"Well, I'd like to have a little chat with you.' 

"Well, that's fine, but really, I'm a little late now, Bun.' 

"Tonight, then?’ 

Tf you like,’ said Henry, getting in the car and slamming the door. 


Once in the car, Henry lit a cigarette and didn't say a word. He'd been 
smoking a lot since he got back from Italy, almost a pack a day, which was 
rare for him. We started into town, and it wasn't until I pulled in at the eye 
doctor's office that he shook himself and looked at me blankly. "What is it?’ 


"What time should I come hack to get you' 


' o J Henry looked out, at the low gray building, at the sign in front that said 
optometry group of hampden. 


‘Good God,' he said, with a snort and a surprised, bitter little laugh. 'Keep 
driving.’ 


I went to bed early that night, around eleven; at twelve I was awakened by a 
loud persistent banging at the front door. I lay in bed and listened for a 
minute, then got up to see who it was. 


In the dark hallway I met Henry, in his bathrobe, fumbling with his glasses; 
he was holding one of his kerosene lanterns and it cast long, weird shadows 
on the narrow walls. When he saw me, he put a finger to his lips. We stood in 
the hall, listening. 


The lamplight was eerie, and, standing there motionless in our bathrobes, 
sleepy, with shadows flickering all around, I felt as though I had woken from 
one dream into an even more remote one, some bizarre wartime bomb shelter 
of the unconscious. 


We stood there for a long time, it seemed, long after the banging stopped and 
we heard footsteps crunching away. Henry looked over at me, and we were 
quiet for a bit longer. ‘It's all right now,’ he said at last, and he turned away 
abruptly, the lamplight bobbing crazily about him as he went back to his 
room. 


I waited a moment or two longer in the dark, and then went back to my own 
room and to bed. 


The next day, around three in the afternoon, I was ironing a shirt in the 
kitchen when there was another knock at the door. I went into the hall and 
found Henry standing there. 


‘Does that sound like Bunny to you?’ he said quietly. 


'No,' I said. This knock was fairly light; Bunny always beat on the door as if 
to bash it in. 


‘Go around to the side window and see if you can see who it is.’ 


I went to the front room and advanced cautiously to the side; there were no 
curtains and it was hard to get to the far windows ^ without exposing oneself 
to view. They were at an odd angle ™ and all I could see was the shoulder of 
a black coat, with a silk scarf blown out in the wind behind it. I crept back 


through the kitchen to Henry. 'I can't really see, but it might be Francis,’ I said. 


‘Oh, you can let him in, I suppose,’ said Henry, and he turned and went back 
towards his part of the house. 


I went to the front room and opened the door. Francis was looking back over 
his shoulder, wondering, I suppose, if he should leave. 'Hi,' I said. 


He turned around and saw me. ‘Hello!’ he said. His face seemed to have got 
much thinner and sharper since I'd seen him last. 'I thought nobody was home. 
How are you feeling?’ 


‘Fine.’ 

"You look pretty bad to me.’ 

"You don't look so good yourself I said, laughing. 

‘I drank too much last night and gave myself a stomachache. 


I want to see this tremendous head wound of yours. Are you going to have a 
scar?’ 


I led him into the kitchen and shoved aside the ironing board so he could sit 
down. 'Where's Henry?’ he said, pulling off his gloves. 


In the back.’ 


He began to unwind his scarf. Till just run say hello to him and I'll be right 
back,' he said briskly, and slid away. 


He was gone a long time. I had got bored and had almost finished ironing my 
shirt when suddenly I heard Francis's voice rise, with a hysterical edge. I got 
up and went into the bedroom so I could hear better what he was saying. 


— thinking about? My God, but he's in a state. You can't tell me you know 
what he might ' 


There was a low murmur now, Henry's voice, then Francis's voice came back 
to me again. 


'I don't care,’ he said hotly. ‘Jesus, but you've done it now. 


I've been in town two hours and already — I don't care.’ he said in reply to 
another murmur from Henry. ‘Besides, it's a bit late for that, isn't it?’ 


Silence. Then Henry began to talk, too indistinctly for me to hear. 


"You don't like it? You?’ said Francis. 'What about me?’ 
His voice dropped suddenly and then resumed, too quietly for me to hear. 
I walked quietly back to the kitchen and put on water for tea. 


I was still thinking about what I'd heard when, several minutes later, there 
were footsteps and Francis emerged in the kitchen, edging his way around the 
ironing board to gather his gloves and scarf. 


‘Sorry to run,’ he said. 'I've got to unpack the car and start cleaning my 
apartment. That cousin of mine tore it all to pieces. 


I don't believe he took out the garbage once the whole time he was there. Let 
me see your head wound.’ 


I pulled back the hair on my forehead and showed him the place. I'd had the 
stitches out long ago and it was nearly gone. 


He leaned forward to peer at it through his pince-nez. 'Goodness, I must be 
blind, I can't see a thing. When do classes start? 


Wednesday?’ 
"Thursday, I think. 
‘See you then,’ he said, and he was gone. 


I put my shirt on a hanger and then went into the bedroom and started to 
pack my things. Monmouth House opened that afternoon; maybe Henry 
would drive me to school with my suitcases later on. 


I was just about finished when Henry called me from the back of the 
apartment. 'Richard?' 


"Yes?' 
"Would you come here for a moment, please?’ 


I went back to his room. He was sitting on the side of the I (old-out bed, his 
sleeves rolled up to the elbows and a game of jh solitaire spread out on the 
blanket at the foot. His hair had fallen to the wrong side and I could see the 
long scar at his hairline, all dented and puckered, with ridges of white flesh 
cutting across it to the browbone. 


He looked up at me. "Will you do a favor for me?’ he said. 


‘Sure.’ 


He took a deep breath through the nostrils and pushed his glasses up on the 
bridge of his nose. "Will you call Bunny and ask him if he'd like to come over 
for a few minutes?’ he said. 


I was so surprised that I didn't say anything for half a second. 
Then I said: 'Sure. Fine. I'll be glad to.' 

He closed his eyes and rubbed his temple with his fingertips. 
Then he blinked at me. "Thank you,' he said. 

‘No, really. 


'If you want to take some of your things back to school this afternoon, you're 
more than welcome to borrow the car,’ he said evenly. 


I got his drift. 'Sure,' I said, and it was only after I'd loaded my suitcases in 
the car and driven them to Monmouth and got Security to unlock my room 
that I called Bunny from the pay phone downstairs, a safe half hour later. 


Chapter 4 ^ 


Somehow I thought that when the twins returned, when we were settled in 
again, when we were back at our Liddell and Scotts and had suffered through 
two or three Greek Prose Composition assignments together, we would all fall 
back into the comfortable routine of the previous term and everything would 
be the same as it had been before. But about this I was wrong. 


Charles and Camilla had written to say they would arrive in Hampden on the 
late train, around midnight on Sunday, and on Monday afternoon, as students 
began to straggle back to Monmouth House with their skis and their stereos 
and their cardboard boxes, I had some idea that they might come to see me, 
but they didn't. On Tuesday I didn't hear from them either, or from Henry or 
anybody but Julian, who had left a cordial little note in my post-office box 
welcoming me back to school and asking me to translate an ode of Pindar's for 
our first class. 


On Wednesday I went to Julian's office to ask him to sign my registration 
cards. He seemed happy to see me. "You look well,’ he said, ‘but not as well as 
you ought. Henry's been keeping me up to date on your recovery.’ 


‘Oh?’ 


‘It was a good thing, I suppose, that he came back early,’ said Julian, 
glancing through my cards, 'but I was surprised to see him, too. He showed up 
at my house straight from the airport, in the middle of a snowstorm, in the 
middle of the night.’ 


This was interesting. 'Did he stay with you?’ I said. 
"Yes, but only a few days. He'd been ill himself, you know. In Italy.’ 
"What was the matter?’ 


"Henry's not as strong as he looks. His eyes bother him, he , has terrible 
headaches, sometimes he has a difficult time... I « didn't think he was in a 
proper condition to travel, but it was lucky he didn't stay on or he wouldn't 
have found you. Tell me. 


How did you end up in such a dreadful place? Wouldn't your parents give 
you money, or didn't you want to ask?’ 


'I didn't want to ask.’ 


"Then you are more of a stoic than I am,’ he said, laughing. 
‘But your parents do not seem very fond of you, am I correct?’ 
‘They're not that crazy about me, no.' 


"Why is that, do you suppose? Or is it rude of me to ask? I should think that 
they would be quite proud, yet you seem more an orphan than our real 
orphans do. Tell me,' he said, looking up, 'why is it that the twins haven't been 
in to see me?’ 


'I haven't seen them, either.’ 


"Where can they be? I haven't even seen Henry. Only you and Edmund. 
Francis telephoned but I only spoke to him for a moment. He was in a hurry, 
he said he would stop by later, but he hasn't... I don't think Edmund's learned 
a word of Italian, do you?’ 


‘I don't speak Italian.’ 


"Nor do I, not anymore. I used to speak it rather well. I lived in Florence for a 
while but that was nearly thirty years ago. Will you be seeing any of the 
others this afternoon?’ 


"Maybe.' 


‘Of course, it's a matter of small importance, but the registration slips should 
be at the Dean's office this afternoon and he will be irritated that I haven't sent 
them. Not that I care, but he is certainly in a position to make things 
unpleasant for any of you, if he chooses.’ 


I was somewhat annoyed. The twins had been in Hampden three days and 
hadn't called once. So when I left Julian's I stopped by their apartment, but 
they weren't home. 


They weren't at dinner that night, either. Nobody was. 


Though I had expected at least to see Bunny, I stopped by his room on the 
way to the dining hall and found Marion locking his door. She told me, rather 
officiously, that the two of them had plans and would not be in until late. 


I ate alone and walked back to my room in the snowy twilight, with a sour, 
humorless feeling as if I were the victim of a practical joke. At seven I called 
Francis, but there was no answer. There was no answer at Henry's, either. 


I read Greek till midnight. After I'd brushed my teeth and washed my face 
and was almost ready for bed, I went downstairs and called again. Still no 


answer anywhere. I got my quarter back after the third call and tossed it up in 
the air. Then, on a whim, I called Francis's number in the country. 


There was no answer there, either, but something made me hold the line 
longer than I should have and finally, after about thirty rings, there was a click 
and Francis said gruffly into the receiver, 'Hullo?’ He was making his voice 
deep in an attempt to disguise it but he didn't fool me; he couldn't bear to 
leave a phone unanswered, and I had heard him use that silly voice more than 
once before. 


Hullo?’ he said again, and the forced deepness of his voice broke into a 
quaver at the end. I pressed the receiver hook and heard the line go dead. 


I was tired but I couldn't sleep; my irritation and perplexity were growing 
stronger, kept in motion by a ridiculous sense of unease. 


I turned on the lights and looked through my books until I found a Raymond 
Chandler novel I had brought from home. I had read it before, and thought 
that a page or two would put me to sleep, but I had forgotten most of the plot 
and before I knew it I'd read fifty pages, then a hundred. 


Several hours passed and I was wide awake. The radiators were on full blast 
and the air in my room was hot and dry. I began to feel —^ —as sputlgs'g and 
deserted. Everything smelled of fresh paint. I walked through the laundry 
room — pristine, brightly lit, its creamy walls alien without the tangle of 
graffiti which had accumulated during the term before — and bought a can of 
Coke from the phosphorescent bank of machines which hummed at the end of 
the hall. 


Walking around the other way, I was startled to hear a hollow, tinny music 
coming from the common rooms. The television was on; Laurel and Hardy, 
obscured by a blizzard of electronic snow, were trying to move a grand piano 
up a great many flights of stairs. At first I thought they were playing to an 
empty room, but then I noticed the top of a shaggy blond head, lolling against 
the back of the lone couch that faced the set. 


I walked over and sat down. Bunny,’ I said. 'How are you?’ 


He looked over at me, eyes glazed, and it took him a second or two to 
recognize me. He stank of liquor. 'Dickie boy,' he said thickly. 'Yes.' 


"What are you doing?’ 
He burped. 'Feeling pretty sick, to tell you the God's honest truth." 


‘Drink too much?' 


"Naah,' he said crossly. ‘Stomach flu.' 


Poor Bunny. He never would own up to being drunk; he'd always say he had 
a headache or needed to get the prescription for his glasses readjusted. He was 
like that about a lot of things, actually. One morning after he'd had a date with 
Marion, he showed up at breakfast with his tray full of milk and sugar 
doughnuts and when he sat down I saw that there was a big purple hickey on 
his neck above the collar. 'How'd you get that, Bun?’ I asked him. I was only 
joking, but he was very offended. 


‘Fell down some stairs,’ he said brusquely, and ate his doughnuts in silence. 


I a..-.-~. =«e stuniac R-ITu ruse. 'Maybe il thing you picked up overseas,’ I 
said. 


"Maybe.' 
‘Been to the infirmary?’ 


"Nope. Nothing they can do. Got to let it run its course Better not sit so close 
to me, old man.’ 


Though I was all the way at the opposite end of the couch, I shifted down 
even further. We sat looking at the television for a while without saying 
anything. The reception was terrible. Ollie had just pushed Stan's hat down 
over his eyes; Stan was wandering in circles, bumping into things, tugging 
desperately at the brim with both hands. He ran into Ollie and Ollie smacked 
him on the head with the heel of his palm. Glancing over at Bunny, I saw that 
he was gripped by this. His gaze was fixed and his mouth slightly open. 


‘Bunny,’ I said. 

"Yeah?' he said without looking away. 

"Where is everybody?’ 

‘Asleep, probably,’ he said irritably. 

"Do you know if the twins are around?’ 

'I guess.’ 

"Have you seen them?’ 

No,’ ‘What's wrong with everybody? Are you mad at Henry or something?’ 


He didn't answer. Looking at the side of his face, I saw that it was absolutely 


blank. For a moment I was unnerved and I glanced back at the television. "Did 
you have a fight in Rome, or what?’ 


All of a sudden, he cleared his throat noisily, and I thought he was going to 
tell me to mind my own business, but instead he pointed at something and 
cleared his throat again. ‘Are you going to drink that Coke?’ he said. 


I had forgotten all about it. It lay sweating and unopened on Ithe sofa .1 
handed it to him and he cracked it open and took a large greedy drink and 
burped. 


‘Pause that refreshes,’ he said, and then: 'Let me give you a little tip about 
Henry, old man.’ 


"What?’ 


He took another swig and turned back to the TV. 'He's not what you think he 
is.' 


"What does that mean?’ I said after a long pause. 
'I mean, he's not what you think,’ he said, louder this time. 


‘Or what Julian thinks or anybody else.' He took another slug of the Coke. 
‘For a while there he had me fooled but good.’ 


"Yeah,' I said uncertainly, after another long moment. The uncomfortable 
assumption had begun to dawn on me that maybe this was all some sex- 
related thing I was better off not knowing. 


I looked at the side of his face: petulant, irritable, glasses low on * the tip of 
his sharp little nose and the beginnings of jowls at his jawline. Might Henry 
have made a pass at him in Rome? Incredible, but a possible hypothesis. If he 
had, certainly, all hell would have broken loose. I could not think of much 
else that would involve this much whispering and secrecy, or that would have 
so strong an effect on Bunny. He was the only one of us who had a girlfriend 
and I was pretty sure he slept with her, but at the same time he was incredibly 
prudish — touchy, easily offended, at root hypocritical. Besides, there was 
something unquestionably odd about the way Henry was constantly shelling 
out money to him: paying his tabs, footing his bills, doling out cash like a 
husband to a spendthrift wife. Perhaps Bunny had allowed his greed to get the 
better of him, and was angry to discover that Henry's largesse had strings 
attached. 


But did it? There were certainly strings somewhere, though easy as it seemed 
on the face of it — I wasn't sure that this was where those particular strings led. 


There was of course that thing with Julian in the hallway; still, that had been 
very different. I had lived with Henry for a month, and there hadn't been the 
faintest hint of that sort of tension, which I, being rather more disinclined that 
way than not, am quick to pick up on. I had caught a strong breath of it from 
Francis, a whiff of it at times from Julian; and even Charles, who I knew was 
interested in women, had a sort of naive, prepubescent shyness of them that a 
man like my father would have interpreted alarmingly — but with Henry, zero. 
Geiger counters dead. If anything, it was Camilla he seemed fondest of, 
Camilla he bent over attentively when she spoke, Camilla who was most often 
the recipient of his infrequent smiles. 


And even if there was a side of him of which I was unaware (which was 
possible) was it possible that he was attracted to Bunny? The answer to this 
seemed, almost unquestionably, No. 


Not only did he behave as if he wasn't attracted to Bunny, he acted as if he 
were hardly able to stand him. And it seemed that he, disgusted by Bunny in 
what appeared to be virtually all respects, would be far more disgusted in that 
particular one than even I would be. It was possible for me to recognize, in a 
general sort of way, that Bunny was handsome, but if I brought the lens any 
closer and tried to focus on him in a sexual light, all I got was a repugnant 
miasma of sour-smelling shirts and muscles gone to fat and dirty socks. Girls 
didn't seem to mind that sort of thing, but to me he was about as erotic as an 
old football coach. 


All at once I felt very tired. I stood up. Bunny stared at me, his mouth open. 
Tm getting sleepy, Bun,’ I said. 'See you tomorrow, maybe.’ 


He blinked at me. 'Hope you're not coming down with this damn bug, old 
man,’ he said curtly. 


The, too,' I said, feeling sorry for him, unaccountably so. 
‘Good night.’ 


I awoke at six on Thursday morning, intending to do some Greek, but my 
Liddell and Scott was nowhere to be found. I looked and looked and, with a 
sinking feeling, remembered: it was at Henry's house. I had noticed its 
absence while I was packing; for some reason it wasn't with my other books. I 
had made a hurried but diligent search which I finally abandoned, telling 
myself I'd be back for it later. This put me in a fairly serious fix. My first 
Greek class wasn't till Monday, but Julian had given me a good deal of work 
and the library was still closed, as they were changing the catalogues from 
Dewey decimal to Library of Congress. 


I went downstairs and dialed Henry's number, and got, as I expected, no 
answer. Radiators clanged and hissed in the drafty hall. As I listened to the 
phone ring for about the thirtieth time, suddenly it occurred to me: why not 
just run up to North Hampden and get it? He wasn't there — at least I didn't 
think he was — and I had the key. It would be a long drive for him from 
Francis's. If I hurried I could be there in fifteen minutes. I hung up and ran out 
the front door. 


In the chilly morning light, Henry's apartment looked deserted, and his car 
was neither in the drive nor in any of the places up and down the street where 
he liked to park when he didn't want anyone to know he was home. But just to 
make sure I knocked. Pas de reponse. Hoping I wouldn't find him standing in 
the front hall in his bathrobe, peering around a door at me, I turned the key 
gingerly and stepped inside. 


No one was there, but the apartment was a mess — books, papers, empty 
coffee cups and wineglasses; there was a slight film of dust on everything, and 
the wine in the glasses had dried to a sticky purplish stain at the bottom. The 
kitchen was full of dirty dishes and the milk had been left out of the 
refrigerator and turned bad. Henry, generally, was clean as a cat, and I'd never 
even seen him take off his coat without hanging it up immediately. 


A dead fly floated in the bottom of one of the coffee cups. 


Nervous, feeling as if I'd stumbled on the scene of a crime, I searched the 
rooms quickly, my footsteps ringing loud in the silence. Before long The saw 
my book, lying on the hall table, one of the most obvious places I could have 
left it. How could I have missed it? I wondered; I'd looked all over the day I'd 
left; had Henry found it, left it out for me? I grabbed it up quickly and had 
started out — jittery, anxious to leave — when my eye was caught by a scrap of 
paper also on the table. 


The handwriting was Henry's: TWA 219 795 X 4 


A telephone number with a 617 area code had been added in Francis's hand, 
at the bottom. I picked the sheet up and studied it. It was written on the back 
of an overdue notice from the library dated only three days before. 


Without quite knowing why, I set down my Liddell and Scott and took the 
paper with me to the telephone in the front room. 


The area code was Massachusetts, probably Boston; I checked my watch and 
then dialed the number, reversing the charges to Dr Roland's office. 


A wait, two rings, a click. "You have reached the law offices of Robeson Tail 
on Federal Street,' a recording informed me. 


‘Our switchboard is now closed. Please call within the hours of nine to ' 


I hung up, and stood staring at the paper. I was remembering, with some 
unease, the crack Bunny had made about Henry needing a lawyer. Then I 
picked up the phone again and dialed directory assistance for the information 
number of TWA. 


‘This is Mr Henry Winter,’ I told the operator. 'I'm calling, um, to confirm my 
reservation.’ 


‘Just a moment, Mr Winter. Your reservation number?’ 


'Uh,' I said, trying to think fast, pacing back and forth, 'I don't seem to have 
my information handy right now, maybe you could just —' Then I noticed the 
number in the upper right-hand corner. 


"Wait. Maybe this is it .219?' 
There was the sound of keys being punched in on a computer. 


I tapped my foot impatiently and glanced out the window for Henry's car. 
Then I remembered, with a shock, that Henry didn't have his car. I hadn't 
taken it back to him after I borrowed it on Sunday and it was still parked 
behind the tennis courts where I'd left it. 


In a panicky reflex, I nearly hung up — if Henry didn't have his car I couldn't 
hear him, he might be halfway up the walk that instant — but just then the 
operator came back on. 'All set, Mr Winter,’ she said briskly. "Didn't the agent 
who sold you the tickets tell you it wasn't necessary to confirm on tickets 
purchased less than three days in advance?’ 


‘No,’ I said impatiently, and was about to hang up when I was struck by what 
she'd said. "Three days?’ I repeated. 


"Well, generally your reservations are confirmed at date of purchase, 
especially on non-refundable fares such as these. The agent should have 
informed you of this when you purchased the tickets on Tuesday,’ Date of 
purchase? Non-refundable? I stopped pacing. 'Let me make sure I have the 
correct information,’ I said. 


‘Certainly, Mr Winter,’ she said crisply. 'TWA flight 401, departing Boston 
tomorrow from Logan Airport, gate 12., at 8:45 p.m., arriving Buenos Aires, 
Argentina, at 6:01 a.m. That's with a stopover in Dallas. Four fares at seven 
hundred and ninety-five dollars one way, let's see’ — she punched in some 
more numbers on the computer — 'that comes to a total of three thousand one 
hundred and eighty dollars plus tax, and you chose to pay for that with your 


American Express card, am I correct?’ 
My head began to swim. Buenos Aires'? Four tickets? One way? 
Tomorrow? 


'I hope you and your family have a pleasant flight on TWA, Mr Winter,’ said 
the operator cheerily, and hung up. I stood there, holding the receiver, until a 
dial tone came droning on the other end. 


Suddenly something occurred to me. I put down the telephone and went back 
to the bedroom and threw open the door. The books on the book shelf were 
gone; the padlocked closet stood open, empty; the unfastened lock swung 
open from the hasp. 


For a moment I stood staring at it, at the raised Roman capitals that said yale 
across the bottom, and then went back to the spare bedroom. The closets there 
were empty, too, nothing but coat hangers jingling on the metal rod. I turned 
quickly and almost stumbled over two tremendous pigskin suitcases, strapped 
in black leather, just inside the doorway. I picked one of them up, and the 
weight nearly toppled me. 


My God, I thought, what are they doing? I went back to the hall, replaced the 
paper, and hurried out the front door with my book. 


Once out of North Hampden I walked slowly, extremely puzzled, an 
undertow of anxiety tugging at my thoughts. I felt as if I needed to do 
something, but I didn't know what. Did Bunny know anything about this? 
Somehow, I thought not, and somehow I thought it better not to ask him. 
Argentina. What was in Argentina? Grasslands, horses, cowboys of some sort 
who wore flat-crowned hats with pom-poms hanging from the brim. Borges, 
the writer. Butch Cassidy, they said, had gone into hiding there, along with Dr 
Mengele and Martin Bormann and a score of less pleasant characters. 


It seemed that I remembered Henry telling a story, one night at Francis's 
house, about some South American country — maybe Argentina, I wasn't sure. 
I tried to think. Something about a trip with his father, a business interest, an 
island off the coast... But Henry's father traveled a good deal; besides, if there 
was a connection, what could it possibly be? Four tickets? One way? 


And if Julian knew about it — and he seemed to know everything about 
Henry, even more so than the rest — why had he been inquiring about 
everyone's whereabouts only the day before? 


My head ached. Emerging from the woods near Hampden, into an expanse 
of snow-covered meadow that sparkled in the light, I saw twin threads of 


smoke coming from the age-blacked chimneys at either end of Commons. 
Everything was cold and quiet except for a milk truck that idled at the rear 
entrance as two silent, sleepy-looking men unloaded the wire crates and let 
them fall with a clatter on the asphalt. 


The dining halls were open, though at that hour of the morning there were no 
students, only cafeteria workers and maintenance men eating breakfast before 
their shifts began. I went upstairs and got myself a cup of coffee and a couple 
of soft-boiled eggs, which I ate alone at a table near a window in the empty 
main dining room. 


Classes started today, Thursday, but my first class with Julian wasn't until 
the next Monday. After breakfast I went back to my room and began to work 
on the irregular second aorists. Not until almost four in the afternoon did I 
finally close my books, and when I looked out my window over the meadow, 
the light fading in the west and the ashes and yews casting long shadows on 
the snow, it was as if I'd just woken up, sleepy and disoriented, to find it was 
getting dark and I had slept through the day. 


It was the big back-to-school dinner that night — roast beef, green beans 
almondine, cheese souffle and some elaborate lentil dish for the vegetarians. I 
ate dinner alone at the same table where I'd had my breakfast. The halls were 
packed, everyone smoking, laughing, extra chairs wedged in at full tables, 
people with plates of food roaming from group to group to say hello. 


Next to me was a table of art students, branded as such by their ink-grimed 
fingernails and the self-conscious paint spatters on their clothes; one of them 
was drawing on a cloth napkin with a black felt marker; another was eating a 
bowl of rice using inverted paintbrushes for chopsticks. I had never seen them 
before. As I drank my coffee and gazed around the dining room, it struck me 
that Georges Laforgue had been right, after all: I really was cut off from the 
rest of the college — not that I cared to be on intimate terms, by and large, with 
people who used paintbrushes for cutlery. 


There was a life-or-death attempt being made near my table by a couple of 
Neanderthals looking to collect money for a beer blast in the sculpture studio. 
Actually, I did know these two; it was impossible to attend Hampden and not 
to. One was the son of a famous West Coast racket boss and the other was the 
son of a movie producer. They were, respectively, president and vice- 
president of the Student Council, offices they utilized principally in order to 
organize drinking contests, wet-T-shirt competitions, and female mud- 
wrestling tournaments. They were both well over six feet — slack-jawed, 
unshaven, dumb dumb dumb, the sort who I knew would never go indoors at 
all after daylight savings in the spring but instead would lounge bare-chested 
on the lawn with the Styrofoam cooler and the tape deck from dawn till dusk. 


They were widely held to be good guys, and maybe they were decent enough 
if you lent them your car for beer runs or sold them pot or something; but both 
of them — the movie producer's kid in particular — had a piggish, schizophrenic 
glitter about the eye that I did not care for at all. Party Pig, people called him, 
and not entirely with affection, either; but he liked this name and took a kind 
of a stupid pride in living up to it. He was always getting drunk and doing 
things like setting fires, or stuffing freshmen down chimneys, or throwing beer 
kegs through plate glass windows. 


Party Pig (a. k. a. Jud) and Frank were making their way to my table. Frank 
held out a paint can full of change and crumpled bills. 'Hi, guy,' he said. 'Keg 
party in the sculpture studio tonight. 


Want to give something?’ 


I put down my coffee and fished in my jacket pocket and found a quarter and 
some pennies. 


‘Oh, come on, man,' Jud said, rather menacingly I thought. 
"You can do better than that.’ 


Hoi polloi. Barbaroi. 'Sorry,' I said, and pushed back from the.» table and got 
my coat and left. « 


I went back to my room and sat at my desk and opened my lexicon, but I 
didn't look at it. ‘Argentina?’ I said to the wall. 


On Friday morning I went to my French class. Several students dozed in the 
back, overcome no doubt by the previous evening's festivities. The odor of 
disinfectant and chalkboard cleaner, combined with vibrating fluorescents and 
the monotonous chant of conditional verbs, put me into kind of a trance, too, 
and I sat at my desk swaying slightly with boredom and fatigue, hardly aware 
of the passage of time. 


When I got out I went downstairs to a pay phone and called Francis's number 
in the country and let the phone ring maybe fifty times. No answer. 


I walked back to Monmouth House through the snow and went to my room 
and thought, or, rather, didn't think, but sat on my bed and stared out the 
window at the ice-rimed yews below. 


After a while I got up and went to my desk, but I couldn't work, either. One- 
way tickets, the operator had said. Nonrefundable. 


It was eleven a. m. in California. Both my parents would be at work. I went 


downstairs to my old friend the pay phone and called the number of Francis's 
mother's apartment in Boston, reversing the charges to my father. 


"Well, Richard,’ she said when she finally figured out who I was. 'Darling. 
How nice of you to call us. I thought you were going to come spend 
Christmas with us in New York. Where are you, dear? Can I send somebody 
to pick you up?’ 


"No, thank you. I'm in Hampden,’ I said. 'Is Francis there?’ 
‘Dear, he's at school, isn't he?’ 


‘Excuse me,' I said, suddenly flustered; it had been a mistake to call like this, 
without planning what to say. 'I'm sorry. I think I've made a mistake.’ 


'I beg your pardon?’ 
'I thought he'd said something about going to Boston today.’ 


"Well, if he's here, sweetheart, I haven't seen him. Where did you say you 
were? Are you sure you don't want me to send Chris around to get you?’ 


"No thank you. I'm not in Boston. I'm —' 


"You're calling all the way from school? she said, alarmed. 'Is anything 
wrong, dear?’ 


'No, ma'am, of course not,' I said; for a moment I had my customary impulse 
to hang up but it was too late for that now. 


"He came by last night while I was really sleepy, and I could've sworn he 
said he was going down to Boston — oh! Here he is now! I said stupidly, 
hoping she wouldn't call my bluff. 


"Where, dear? There?’ 


'I see him coming across the lawn. Thank you so much, Mrs er, Abernathy,’ I 
said, badly flustered and unable to remember the name of her present husband. 


‘Call me Olivia, dear. You give that bad boy a kiss for me and tell him to call 
me on Sunday.’ 


I made my goodbyes quickly — by now I'd broken out in a sweat — and was 
just turning to go back up the stairs when Bunny, dressed in one of his smart 
new suits and chewing briskly on a large wad of gum, came striding down the 
rear hall towards me. 


He was the last person I was ready to talk to, but I couldn't get away. 'Hello, 
old man,' he said. 'Where's Henry got off to?’ 


T don't know,’ I said, after an uncertain pause. 


'I don't either,’ he said belligerently. 'Haven't seen him since Monday. Nor 
Francois or the twins, either. Say, who was that on the phone?’ 


I didn't know what to say. 'Francis,' I said. 'I was talking to Francis.’ 

'Hmn,' he said, leaning back with his hands in his pockets. 

"Where was he calling from?’ 

"Hampden, I guess. 

"Not long distance?’ 

My neck prickled. What did he know about this? 'No,' I said. ™ 'Not that I 
know of.’ 1 'Henry didn't say anything to you about going out of town, did 
he?' 

"No. Why?’ 


Bunny was silent. Then he said: There hasn't been a single light on at his 
house the last few nights. And his car is gone. It's not parked anywhere on 
Water Street.’ 


For some strange reason, I laughed. I walked over to the back door, which 
had a window at the top that faced the parking lot behind the tennis courts. 
Henry's car was there, right where I'd parked it, plain as day. I pointed it out to 
him. 'There it is, right there,' I said. ‘See?’ 


Bunny's jaw slowed at its work, and his face clouded with the effort of 
thinking. "Well, that's funny.’ 


‘Why?’ 


A thoughtful pink bubble emerged from his lips, grew slowly, and burst with 
a pop. 'No reason,’ he said briskly, resuming his chewing. 


"Why would they have gone out of town?’ 


He reached up and flipped the hair out of his eyes. ‘You'd be surprised,’ he 
said cheerily. 'What are you up to now, old man?’ 


We went upstairs to my room. On the way he stopped at the house 


refrigerator and peered inside, stooping down myopically to inspect the 
contents. 'Any of this yours, old soak?' he said. 


'No.' 


He reached in and pulled out a frozen cheesecake. Taped to the box was a 
plaintive note: 'Please do not steal this. I am on financial aid. Jenny Drexler.’ 


This'd hit the spot about now,’ he said, glancing quickly up and down the 
hall. ‘Anybody coming?’ 


'No.' 


He stuck the box underneath his coat and, whistling, walked ahead to my 
room. Once inside, he spat out his gum and stuck it on the inside rim of my 
garbage can with a quick, feinting motion, as if he hoped I wouldn't see him 
do it, then sat down and began to eat the cheesecake straight from the box 
with a spoon he'd found on my dresser. 'Phew,' he said. 'This is terrible. 


Want some?’ 
'No thanks.' 


He licked thoughtfully at the spoon. 'Too lemony, is what the problem is. 
And not enough cream cheese.' He paused — thinking, I believed, about this 
handicap — and then said abruptly: 'Tell me. 


You and Henry spent a lot of time together last month, huh?’ 
I was suddenly watchful. 'I guess.' 

‘Do much talking?’ 

‘Some.’ 


"He tell you much about when we were in Rome?’ he said, looking at me 
keenly. 


"Not a whole lot.' 
'He say anything about leaving early?’ 


At last, I thought, relieved. At last we were going to get to the bottom of this 
business. 'No. No, he didn't tell me much at all,' 


I said, which was the truth. 'I knew he'd left early when he showed up here. 
But I didn't know you were still there. Finally I asked him about it one night, 


and he said you were. That's all.’ 
Bunny took a jaded bite of the cheesecake. 'He say why he left?’ 


'No.' Then, when Bunny didn't respond, I added: 'It had something to do with 
money, didn't it?’ 


‘Is that what he told you?’ 


'No.' And then, since he had gone mute again: 'But he did say you were short 
on cash, that he had to pay the rent and stuff. Is that right?’ 


Bunny, his mouth full, made a brushing, dismissive motion with one hand. 


"That Henry,’ he said. 'I love him, and you love him, but just between the two 
of us I think he's got a little bit of Jew blood.' 


"What?' I said, startled. 


He had just taken another big bite of cheesecake, and it took W! him a 
moment to answer me. 


'I never heard anybody complain so much about helping out a pal,’ he finally 
said. 'I tell you what it is. He's afraid of people taking advantage of him.' 


"How do you mean?’ 


He swallowed. 'I mean, somebody probably told him when he was little, 
«Son, you have a load of money, and someday people are going to try to 
weasel it out of you."' His hair had fallen over one eye; like an old sea captain, 
he squinted at me shrewdly through the other. 'It's not a question of the 
money, y'see,' he said. 'He don't need it himself, it's the principle of the thing. 
He wants to know that people like him not for his money, you know, but for 
himself I was surprised by this exegesis, which was at odds with what I knew 
to be Henry's frequent and — by my standards of reckoning — extravagant 
generosity. 


‘So it's not about money?’ I said at last. 
"Nope.' 
"Then what is it about, if you don't mind my asking?’ 


Bunny leaned forward, his face thoughtful, and for a moment almost 
transparently frank; and when he opened his mouth again I thought he was 
going to come right out and say what he meant; but instead, he cleared his 
throat and said, if I didn't mind, would I go make him a pot of coffee? 


That night, as I was lying on my bed reading Greek, I was startled by a flash 
of remembrance, almost as if a hidden spotlight had been trained without 
warning on my face. Argentina. The word itself had lost little of its power to 
startle and had, due to my ignorance of the physical place it occupied on the 
globe, assumed a peculiar life of its own. There was the harsh Ar at the 
beginning, which called up gold, idols, lost cities in the jungle, which in turn 
led to the hushed and sinister chamber of Gen, with the bright interrogative 
Tina at the end — all nonsense, of course, but then it seemed in some muddled 
way that the name itself, one of the few concrete facts available to me, might 
itself be a cryptogram or clue. But that wasn't what made me bolt upright, but 
the sudden realization of what time it must be — nine-twenty, I saw, when I 
looked at my watch. So they were all on the plane now (or were they?) 
hurtling towards the bizarre Argentina of my imagination through the dark 
skies. 


I put down my book and went over and sat in a chair by the window, and 
didn't work for the rest of the night. 


The weekend passed, as they will do, and for me it went by in Greek, solitary 
meals in the dining hall, and more of the same old puzzlement back in my 
room. My feelings were hurt, and I missed them more than I would have 
admitted. Bunny was behaving oddly besides. I saw him around a couple of 
times that weekend, with Marion and her friends, talking importantly as they 
stared in goony admiration (they were Elementary Education majors, for the 
most part, who I suppose thought him terribly erudite because he studied 
Greek and wore some little wire-rimmed glasses). Once I saw him with his 
old friend Cloke Rayburn. But I didn't know Cloke well, and I was hesitant to 
stop and say hello. 


I awaited Greek class, on Monday, with acute curiosity. I woke that morning 
at six. Not wanting to arrive insanely early, I sat around my room fully 
dressed for quite some time, and it was with something of a thrill that I looked 
at my watch and realized that if I didn't hurry, I'd be late. I grabbed my books 
and dashed out; halfway to the Lyceum, I realized I was running, and forced 
myself to slow to a walk. 


I had caught my breath by the time I opened the back door. 


Slowly, I climbed the stairs, feet moving, mind oddly blank — the way I'd felt 
as a kid on Christmas morning when, after a night of almost insane 
excitement, I would walk down the hall to the closed door behind which my 
presents lay as if the day were nothing special, suddenly drained of all desire. 


They were all there, all of them: the twins, poised and alert in the 
windowsill; Francis, with his back to me; Henry beside him; and Bunny 


across the table, reared back in his chair. Telling a story of some sort. 'So get 
this,’ he said to Henry and Francis, turning his face sideways to glimpse the 
twins. Everyone's eyes were riveted on him; no one had seen me come in. 
'The warden says, «Son, your pardon hasn't come through from the governor 
and it's already five after. Any last words?» So the guy thinks for a minute, 
and as they're leading him into the chamber' — he brought his pencil up close 
to his eyes and studied it for a moment — ‘he looks over his shoulder and says, 
«Well, Governor So-and-So has certainly lost my vote in the next election!" 
Laughing, he tipped back even further in his chair; then he looked up and saw 
me standing like an idiot in the doorway. 'Oh, come in, come in,’ he said, 
bringing the front legs of the wooden chair down with a thump. 


The twins glanced up, startled as a pair of deer. Except for a certain tightness 
around the jaw, Henry was as serene as the Buddha, but Francis was so white 
he was almost green. 


"We're just chucking around a couple jokes before class,’ said Bunny 
genially, leaning back in his chair. He tossed the hair out of his eyes. 'Okay. 
Smith and Jones commit an armed robbery and they both get death row. Of 
course, they go through all the usual channels of appeal but Smith's runs out 
first and he's slotted for the chair.’ He made a resigned, philosophical gesture 
and then, unexpectedly, winked at me. 'So,' he continued, 'they let Jones out to 
see the execution and he's watching them strap his buddy in' — I saw Charles, 
his eyes blank, biting down hard into his lower lip — ‘when the warden comes 
up. «Heard anything on your appeal, Jones?» he says. «Not much, Warden,» 
says Jones. 


«Well, then,» says the warden, looking at his watch, «hardly worth going 
back to your cell then, is it?"' I Ic threw back his head and laughed, pleased as 
all get-out, but no one else even smiled. 


When Bunny started in again (‘And then there's the one about the Old West — 
this is when they still hung folks...") Camilla edged over on the windowsill 
and smiled nervously at me. 


I went over and sat between her and Charles. She gave me a quick kiss on 
the cheek. 'How are you?’ she said. ‘Did you wonder where we were?’ 


'I can't believe we haven't seen you,’ said Charles quietly, turning towards me 
and crossing his ankle over his knee. His foot was trembling violently, as if it 
had a life of its own, and he put a hand on it to still it. 'We had a terrible 
mishap with the apartment.’ 


I didn't know what I'd expected to hear from them, but this was not it. 
"What?' I said. 


"We left the key back in Virginia.’ 
"Aunt Mary-Gray had to drive all the way to Roanoke to Federal Express it.’ 
'I thought you had someone subletting,’ I said suspiciously. 


"He left a week ago. Like idiots we told him to mail us the key. The landlady 
is in Florida. We've been in the country at Francis's the whole time. 


"Trapped like rats. 


‘Francis drove us out there and about two miles from the house something 
terrible happened to the car,' said Charles. 


‘Black smoke and grinding noises. 
"The steering went out. We ran into a ditch.’ 


They were both talking very rapidly. For a moment, Bunny's voice rose 
stridently above them. '... Now this judge had a particular system he liked to 
follow. He'd hang a cattle thief on a Monday, a card cheat on a Tuesday, 
murderers on Wednesday ' 


. so after that,’ Charles was saying, 'we had to walk to Francis's and for 
days we called Henry to come get us. But he wasn't answering the phone — 
you know what it's like to try to get in touch with him ' 


There was no food at Francis's house except some cans of black olives and a 
box of Bisquick.' 


"Yes. We ate olives and Bisquick. 


Could this be true? I wondered suddenly. Briefly I was cheered — my God, 
how silly I had been — but then I remembered the way Henry's apartment had 
looked, the suitcases by the door. 


Bunny was working up to a big finish. 'So the judge says, «Son, it's a Friday, 
and I'd like to go on and hang you today, but I'm going to have to wait until 
next Tuesday because "There wasn't any milk, even,' said Camilla. 'We had to 
mix the Bisquick with water.’ 


There was the slight sound of a throat being cleared and I looked up and saw 
Julian closing the door behind him. 


‘Goodness, you magpies,' he said into the abrupt silence that fell. "Where 
have you all been?’ 


Charles coughed, his eyes fixed on a point across the room, and began rather 
mechanically to tell the story of the apartment key and the car in the ditch and 
the olives and the Bisquick. The wintry sun, coming in at a slant through the 
window, gave everything a frozen, precisely detailed look; nothing seemed 
real, and I felt as though this were some complicated film I'd started watching 
in the middle and couldn't quite get the drift of. Bunny's jailhouse jokes had 
for some reason unsettled me, though I remembered him telling an awful lot 
of jokes like that, back in the fall. They had been met, then as now, with a 
strained silence, but then they were silly, bad jokes. I had always assumed the 
reason he told them was because he had some corny old Lawyer's Joke Book 
up in his room or something, right up there on the shelf with Bob Hope's 
autobiography, the Fu Manchu novels, and Men of Thought and Deed. 
(Which, as it eventually turned out, he did.) 


"Why didn't you call me?’ said Julian, perplexed and perhaps a little slighted, 
when Charles finished his story. 


The twins looked at him blankly. 
"We never thought of it.’ Camilla said. 


Julian laughed and recited an aphorism from Xenophon, which was literally 
about tents and soldiers and the enemy nigh, but which carried the implication 
that in troubled times it was best to go to one's own people for help. 


I walked home from class alone, in a state of bewilderment and turmoil. By 
now my thoughts were so contradictory and disturbing that I could no longer 
even speculate, only wonder dumbly at what was taking place around me; I 
had no classes for the rest of the day and the thought of going back to my 
room was intolerable. I went to Commons and sat in an armchair by the 
window for maybe forty-five minutes. Should I go to the library? Take 
Henry's car, which I still had, and go for a drive, maybe see if there was a 
matinee at the movie house in town? 


Should I go ask Judy Poovey for a Valium? 


I decided, finally, that the last of these would be a prerequisite for any other 
plan. I walked back to Monmouth House and up to Judy's room, only to find a 
note in gold paint-marker on the door: 'Beth — Come to Manchester for lunch 
with Tracy and me? 


I'm in the costume shop till eleven. J.’ 


I stood staring at Judy's door, which was adorned with photographs of 
automobile crashes, lurid headlines cut from the Weekly World News, and a 
nude Barbie doll hanging from the doorknob by a noose. By now it was one 


o'clock. I walked back to my pristine white door at the end of the hall, the 
only one in the suite unobscured by taped-up religious propaganda and posters 
of the Fleshtones and suicidal epithets from Artaud, and wondered how all 
these people were able to put up all this crap on their doors so fast and why 
they did it in the first place. 


I lay on my bed and looked at the ceiling, trying to guess when Judy would 
return, trying to think of what to do in the meantime, when there was a knock 
at the door. 


It was Henry. I opened the door a little wider and stared at him and said 
nothing. 


He gazed back at me with a fixed and patient unconcern. He was level-eyed 
and calm and had a book tucked under his arm. 


‘Hello,’ he said. 

There was another pause, longer than the first. 'Hi,' I said, after a while. 
"How are you?’ 

Fine. 

"That's good.' 

There was another long silence. 

‘Are you doing anything this afternoon?’ he said politely. 

'No,' I said, taken aback. 

"Would you like to go on a drive with me?’ 

I got my coat. 


Once well out of Hampden, we turned off the main highway and onto a 
stretch of gravel road that I had never seen. "Where are we going?’ I said, 
rather uneasy. 


'I thought we might go out and take a look at an estate sale on the Old 
Quarry Road,’ said Henry, unperturbed. 


I was as surprised as I've ever been at anything in my life when the road 
finally did bring us out, about an hour later, to a large house with a sign in 
front that said estate sale. 


Though the house itself was magnificent, the sale turned out not to be much: 
a grand piano covered with a display of silver and cracked glassware; a 
grandfather clock; several boxes full of records, kitchen implements, and toys; 
and some upholstered furniture badly scratched by cats, all out in the garage. 


I leafed through a stack of old sheet music, keeping Henry in the corner of 
my eye. He poked around unconcernedly in the silver; played a disinterested 
bar of "Traumerei' on the piano with one hand; opened the door of the 
grandfather clock and had a look at the works; had a long chat with the 
owner's niece, who had just come down from the big house, about when was 
the best time to put out tulip bulbs. After I had gone through the sheet music 
twice, I moved to the glassware and then the records; Henry bought a garden 
hoe for twenty-five cents. 


Tm sorry to have dragged you all the way out here,’ he said on the way 
home. 


That's all right,’ I said, slouched down in my seat very close to the door. 


Tm a bit hungry. Are you hungry at all? Would you like to have something 
to eat?’ 


We stopped at a diner on the outskirts of Hampden. It was virtually deserted 
this early in the evening. Henry ordered an enormous dinner — pea soup, roast 
beef, a salad, mashed potatoes with gravy, coffee, pie — and ate it silently and 
with a great deal of methodical relish. I picked erratically at my omelet and 
had a hard time keeping my eyes off him as we ate. I felt as though I were in 
the dining car of a train and had been seated by the steward with another 
solitary male traveler, some kindly stranger, someone who didn't even speak 
my language, perhaps, but who was still content to eat his dinner with me, 
exuding an air of calm acceptance as if he'd known me all his life. 


When he'd finished he took his cigarettes out of his shirt pocket (he smoked 
Lucky Strikes; whenever I think of him I think of that little red bull's-eye right 
over his heart) and offered me one, shaking a couple out of the pack and 
raising an eyebrow. I shook my head. 


He smoked one and then another, and over our second cup of coffee he 
looked up. 'Why have you been so quiet this afternoon?’ 


I shrugged. 
‘Don't you want to know about our trip to Argentina?’ 


I set my cup in its saucer and stared at him. Then I began to laugh. 


"Yes,' I said. "Yes, I do. Tell me.’ 
‘Don't you wonder how I know? That you know, I mean?’ 


That hadn't occurred to me, and I guess he saw it in my face because now he 
laughed. 'It's no mystery,’ he said. 'When I called to cancel the reservations — 
they didn't want to do it, of course, nonrefundable tickets and all that, but I 
think we've got it worked out now — anyway, when I called the airline they 
were rather surprised, as they said I'd called to confirm only the day before. 


"How did you know it was me?' 


"Who else could it have been? You had the key. I know, I know,’ he said 
when I tried to interrupt him. 'I left you that key on purpose. It would have 
made things easier later on, for various reasons, but by sheer chance you 
happened in at just the wrong time. I had only left the apartment for a few 
hours, you see, and I never dreamed that you'd happen in between midnight 
and seven a. m. I must have missed you by only a few minutes. If you'd 
happened in an hour or so later everything would have been gone.’ 


He took a sip of his coffee. I had so many questions it was useless to try to 
sort them into any coherent order. 'Why did you leave me the key?’ I said at 
last. 


Henry shrugged. 'Because I was pretty sure you wouldn't use it unless you 
had to,’ he said. 'If we'd actually gone, someone would eventually have had to 
open the apartment for the landlady, and I would have sent you instructions on 
who to contact and how to dispose of the things I'd left, but I forgot all about 
that damned Liddell and Scott. Well, I won't say that. I knew you'd left it 
there, but I was in a hurry and somehow I never thought you'd come back for 
it bei Nacht und Nebel, as it were. 


But that was silly of me. You have as much trouble sleeping as I do.' 
‘Let me get this straight. You didn't go to Argentina at all?’ 


Henry snorted, and motioned for the check. 'Of course not,' he said. 'Would I 
be here if we had?’ 


Once he'd paid the check he asked me if I wanted to go to Francis's. 'I don't 
think he's there,’ he said. 


‘So why go there?’ 


"Because my apartment is a mess and I'm staying with him until I can get 
somebody in to clean it up. Do you happen to know of a good maid service? 


Francis said, the last time he had someone from the employment office in 
town, they stole two bottles of wine and fifty dollars from his dresser drawer. 


On the way into North Hampden, it was all I could do to keep from deluging 
Henry with questions, but I kept my mouth shut until we got there. 


'He isn't here, I'm sure,’ he said as he unlocked the front door. 
"Where is he?’ 


"With Bunny. He took him to Manchester for dinner and then I think to some 
movie that Bunny wanted to see. Would you like some coffee?’ 


Francis's apartment was in an ugly 19705 building owned by the college. It 
was roomier and more private than the old oak-floored houses we lived in on 
campus, and as a consequence was much in demand; as a trade-off there were 
linoleum floors, ill-lit halls, and cheap, modern fixtures like at a Holiday Inn. 


Francis didn't seem to mind it much. He had his own furniture there, brought 
out from the country house, but he'd chosen it carelessly and it was an 
atrocious mix of styles, upholstery, light and dark woods. 


A search revealed that Francis had neither coffee nor tea ('He needs to go to 
the grocery store,’ said Henry, looking over my shoulder into yet another 
barren cabinet), only a few bottles of Scotch and some Vichy water. I got 
some ice and a couple of glasses and we took a fifth of Famous Grouse with 
us into 1?7 the shadowy living room, our shoes clicking across the ghastly 
wilderness of white linoleum. 


‘So you didn't go,' I said, after we'd sat down and Henry had poured us each a 
glass. 


'No.' 
"Why not?’ 
Henry sighed, and reached into his breast pocket for a cigarette. 


‘Money,’ he said, as the match flared brightly in the dim. 'I don't have a trust 
like Francis, you see, only a monthly allowance. 


It's much more than I generally need to live on, and for years I've put most of 
it into a savings account. But Bunny's just about cleaned that out. There was 
no way I could put my hands on more than thirty thousand dollars, even if I 
sold my car.’ 


Thirty thousand dollars is a lot of money.’ 


"Yes. 
"Why would you need that much?’ 


Henry blew a smoke ring half into the yellowy circle of light beneath the 
lamp, half into the surrounding dark. 'Because we weren't coming back,’ he 
said. 'None of us have work visas. 


Whatever we took would've had to last the four of us for a long time. 
Incidentally,’ he said, raising his voice as if I'd tried to interrupt him — 
actually, I hadn't, I was only making a sort of inarticulate noise of stupefaction 
— incidentally, Buenos Aires wasn't our destination at all. It was only a stop 
along the way.’ 


"What?’ 


'If we'd had the money, I suppose we would have flown to Paris or London, 
some gateway city with plenty of traffic, and once there to Amsterdam and 
eventually on to South America. 


That way we'd have been more difficult to trace, you see. But we didn't have 
that kind of money, so the alternative was to go to Argentina and from there 
take a roundabout course to Uruguay — a dangerous and unstable place in its 
own right, to my way of thinking, but suitable for our purposes. My father has 
an interest in some developing property down there. We'd have had no 
problem finding a place to live,' 'Did he know about this,' I said, 'your father?’ 


"He would have eventually. As a matter of fact I was hoping to ask you to get 
in touch with him once we were there. Had something unforeseen happened 
he would've been able to help us, even get us out of the country if need be. He 
knows people down there, people in the government. Otherwise, no one 
would know.’ 


"He would do that for you?’ 


"My father and I are not close,’ said Henry, 'but I am his only child.’ He drank 
the rest of his Scotch and rattled the ice around in his glass. 'But anyway. 
Even though I didn't have much ready cash, my credit cards were more than 
adequate, leaving only the problem of raising a sum large enough to live on 
for a while. 


Which is where Francis came in. He and his mother live off the income of a 
trust, as I expect you know, but they also have the right to withdraw as much 
as three percent of the principal per year, which would amount to a sum of 
about one hundred and fifty thousand dollars. Generally this isn't touched 
when it turns up, but in theory either of them can take it out whenever they 


like. A law firm in Boston serves as the trustees, and on Thursday morning we 
left the country house, came into Hampden for a few minutes so the twins and 
I could get our things, and then we all went to Boston and checked into the 
Parker House. That's a lovely hotel, do you know it? No? Dickens used to stay 
there when he came to America. 


‘At any rate, Francis had an appointment with his lawyers, and the twins had 
some things to straighten out with the passport office. It takes more planning 
than you might think to pick up and leave the country, but everything was 
pretty much taken care of; we were leaving the next night and there seemed 
no way things could go wrong. We were a bit worried about the twins, but of 
course it wouldn't have posed a problem even if they'd i?9 had to wait ten 
days or so and follow us down later. I had some things to do myself, but not 
many, and Francis had assured me that getting the money was a simple matter 
of going downtown and signing some papers. His mother would find out he'd 
taken it, but what could she do once he was gone? 


‘But he wasn't back when he said he would be, and three hours passed, then 
four. The twins came back, and the three of us had just ordered up some lunch 
from room service when Francis burst in, half-hysterical. The money for that 
year was all gone, you see. His mother had checked out every cent of the 
principal at the first of the year and hadn't told him about it. It was a nasty 
surprise, but even nastier given the circumstances. 


He'd tried everything he could think of — to borrow money on the trust itself, 
even to assign his interests, which is, if you know anything about trusts, about 
the most desperate thing one can do. The twins were all for going ahead and 
taking our chances. 


But... It was a difficult situation. Once we left we couldn't come back and 
anyway, what were we supposed to do when we got there? Live in a treehouse 
like Wendy and the Lost Boys?’ He sighed. 'So there we were, with our 
suitcases packed and passports ready, but no money. I mean, literally none. 
Between the four of us we had hardly five thousand dollars. There was quite a 
bit of discussion, but in the end we decided our only choice was to come back 
to Hampden. For the time being, at least.’ 


He said this all quite calmly but I, listening to him, felt a lump growing in 
the pit of my stomach. The picture was still wholly obscure, but what I saw of 
it I didn't like at all. I said nothing for a long time, only looked at the shadows 
the lamp cast on the ceiling. 


"Henry, my God,’ I said at last. My voice was flat and strange even to my 
own ears. 


He raised an eyebrow and said nothing, empty glass in hand, face half in 
shadow. 


I looked at him. 'My God,' I said. 'What have you done?’ 


He smiled wryly, and leaned forward out of the light to pour himself some 
more Scotch. 'I think you already have a pretty good idea,’ he said. 'Now let 
me ask you something. Why have you been covering up for us?’ 


"What?’ 


"You knew we were leaving the country. You knew it all the time and you 
didn't tell a soul. Why is that?’ 


The walls had fallen away and the room was black. Henry's face, lit starkly 
by the lamp, was pale against the darkness and stray points of light winked 
from the rim of his spectacles, glowed in the amber depths of his whiskey 
glass, shone blue in his eyes. 


'I don't know,' I said. 
He smiled. 'No?' he said. 
I stared at him and didn't say anything. 


‘After all, we hadn't confided in you,' he said. His gaze on mine was steady, 
intense. 'You could have stopped us any time you wanted and yet you didn't. 
Why?! 


"Henry, what in God's name have you done?’ 
He smiled. "You tell me,’ he said. 


And the horrible thing was, somehow, that I did know. 'You killed 
somebody,’ I said, ‘didn't you?’ 


He looked at me for a moment, and then, to my utter, utter surprise, he 
leaned back in his chair and laughed. 


‘Good for you,' he said. "You're just as smart as I thought you were. I knew 
you'd figure it out, sooner or later, that's what I've told the others all along. 


The darkness hung about our tiny circle of lamplight as heavy and palpable 
as a curtain. With a rush of what was almost motion sickness, I experienced 
for a moment both the claustrophobic feeling that the walls had rushed in 
towards us and the vertiginous one that they receded infinitely, leaving both of 
us suspended in some boundless expanse of dark. I swallowed, and looked 


back at Henry. "Who was it?’ I said. 
He shrugged. 'A minor thing, really. An accident.’ 
"Not on purpose?’ 
"Heavens, no,' he said, surprised. W 'What happened?’ 
'I don't know where to begin.' He paused, and took a drink. 


‘Do you remember last fall, in Julian's class, when we studied what Plato 
calls telestic madness? Bakcheia? Dionysiac frenzy?’ 


"Yes,' I said, rather impatiently. It was just like Henry to bring up something 
like this right now. 


"Well, we decided to try to have one.’ 

For a moment I thought I hadn't understood him. 'What?' I said. 
'I said we decided to try to have a bacchanal.' 
‘Come on. 

"We did.’ 

I looked at him. 'You must be joking.’ 

'No.' 

That's the weirdest thing I've ever heard.’ 

He shrugged. 

"Why would you want to do something like that?’ 
'I was obsessed with the idea.’ 

"Why? 


"Well, as far as I knew, it hadn't been done for two thousand years.’ He 
paused, when he saw he hadn't convinced me. ‘After all, the appeal to stop 
being yourself, even for a little while, is very great,’ he said. "To escape the 
cognitive mode of experience, to transcend the accident of one's moment of 
being. There are other advantages, more difficult to speak of, things which 
ancient sources only hint at and which I myself only understood after the fact.’ 


"Like what?’ 


"Well, it's not called a mystery for nothing,’ said Henry sourly. 


"Take my word for it. But one mustn't underestimate the primal appeal — to 
lose one's self, lose it utterly. And in losing it be born to the principle of 
continuous life, outside the prison of mortality and time. That was attractive to 
me from the first, even when I knew nothing ahont the topic and approached it 
less as potential mystes than anthropologist. Ancient commentators are very 
circumspect about the whole thing. It was possible, with a great deal of work, 
to figure out some of the sacred rituals — the hymns, the sacred objects, what 
to wear and do and say. More difficult was the mystery itself: how did one 
propel oneself into such a state, what was the catalyst?’ His voice was dreamy, 
amused. 


"We tried everything. Drink, drugs, prayer, even small doses of poison. On 
the night of our first attempt, we simply overdrank and passed out in our 
chitons in the woods near Francis's house.' 


"You wore chitons'?’ 
"Yes,' said Henry, irritated. 'It was all in the interests of science. 
We made them from bed sheets in Francis's attic. At any rate. 


The first night nothing happened at all, except we were hung over and stiff 
from having slept on the ground. So the next time we didn't drink as much, 
but there we all were, in the middle of the night on the hill behind Francis's 
house, drunk and in chitons and singing Greek hymns like something from a 
fraternity initiation, and all at once Bunny began to laugh so hard that he fell 
over like a ninepin and rolled down the hill. 


‘It was rather obvious that drink alone wasn't going to do the trick. Goodness. 
I couldn't tell you all the things we tried. Vigils. 


Fasting. Libations. It depresses me even to think about it. We burned 
hemlock branches and breathed the fumes. I knew the Pythia had chewed 
laurel leaves, but that didn't work either. You found those laurel leaves, if you 
recall, on the stove in Francis's kitchen.’ 


I stared at him. "Why didn't I know about any of this?’ I said. 


Henry reached into his pocket for a cigarette. "Well, really,’ he said, 'I think 
that's kind of obvious.’ 


"What do you mean?’ 


‘Of course we weren't going to tell you. We hardly knew you. 


You would have thought we were crazy.’ He was quiet for a I moment. 'You 
see, we had almost nothing to go on,’ he said. 'I ^ suppose in a certain way I 
was misled by accounts of the Pythia, ™ the pneuma enthusiastikon, 
poisonous vapors and so forth. Those processes, though sketchy, are more 
well documented than Bacchic methods, and I thought for a while that the two 
must be related. Only after a long period of trial and error did it become 
evident that they were not, and that what we were missing was something, in 
all likelihood, quite simple. Which it was.' 


"And what might that have been?’ 


‘Only this. To receive the god, in this or any other mystery, one has to be in a 
state of euphemia, cultic purity. That is at the very center of Bacchic mystery. 
Even Plato speaks of it. Before the Divine can take over, the mortal self— the 
dust of us, the part that decays — must be made clean as possible.’ 


‘How is that?’ 


‘Through symbolic acts, most of them fairly universal in the Greek world. 
Water poured over the head, baths, fasting — Bunny wasn't so good about the 
fasting nor about the baths, either, if you ask me but the rest of us went 
through the motions. The more we did it, though, the more meaningless it all 
began to seem, until, one day, I was struck by something rather obvious — 
namely, that any religious ritual is arbitrary unless one is able to see past it to 
a deeper meaning.’ He paused. 'Do you know,’ he said, 'what Julian says about 
the Divine Comedy'?' 


"No, Henry, I don't.’ 
‘That it's incomprehensible to someone who isn't a Christian? 


That if one is to read Dante, and understand him, one must become a 
Christian if only for a few hours? It was the same with this. It had to be 
approached on its own terms, not in a voyeuristic light or even a scholarly 
one. At the first, I suppose, it was impossible to see it any other way, looking 
at it as we did in fragments, through centuries. The vitality of the act was 
entirely obfuscated, the beauty, the terror, the sacrifice.’ He took one last drag 
of his cigarette and put it out. 'Quite simply,’ he said, 'we didii I believe. And 
belie! was the one condition which was absolutely necessary. Belief, and 
absolute surrender. 


I waited for him to continue. 


‘At this point, you must understand, we were on the verge of giving up,’ he 
said calmly. 'The enterprise had been interesting, but not that interesting; and 
besides, it was a good deal of trouble. 


You don't know how many times you almost stumbled on us.’ 
'No?' 


'No.' He took a drink of his whiskey. 'I don't suppose you remember coming 
downstairs one night in the country, about three in the morning,' he said. 
'Down to the library to get a book. 


We heard you on the stairs. I was hidden behind the draperies; I could have 
reached out and touched you if I'd wanted. Another time you woke up before 
we even got home. We had to slip around to the back door, sneak up the stairs 
like cat burglars — it was very tiresome, all that creeping around barefoot in 
the dark. 


Besides, it was getting cold. They say that the oreibasia took place in 
midwinter, but I daresay the Peloponnesus is considerably milder that time of 
year than Vermont. 


'We'd worked on it so long, though, and it seemed senseless, in light of our 
revelation, not to try once more before the weather turned. Everything got 
serious all of a sudden. We fasted for three days, longer than we ever had 
before. A messenger came to me in a dream. Everything was going 
beautifully, on the brink of taking wing, and I had a feeling that I'd never had, 
that reality itself was transforming around us in some beautiful and dangerous 
fashion, that we were being driven by a force we didn't understand, towards 
an end I did not know.' He reached for his drink again. 'The only problem was 
Bunny. He didn't grasp, in some fundamental way, that things had changed 
significantly. 


We were closer than we'd ever been, and every day counted; already it was 
terribly cold, and if it snowed, which it might have any day, we'd have had to 
wait till spring. I couldn't bear the thought that, after everything we'd done, 
he'd ruin it at the last minute. And I knew he would. At the crucial moment 
he'd start to tell some asinine joke and ruin everything. By the second day I 
was having my doubts, and then, on the afternoon of the night itself, Charles 
saw him in Commons having a grilled cheese sandwich and a milk shake. 
That did it. We decided to slip away without him. To go out on the weekends 
was too risky, since you'd almost caught us several times already, so we'd 
been driving out late on Thursday and getting back about three or four the 
next morning. Except this time we left early, before dinner, and didn't say a 
word to him about it.' 


He lit a cigarette. There was a long pause. 


'So?' I said. 'What happened?’ 


He laughed. 'I don't know what to say.' 

"What do you mean?’ 

'I mean that it worked.’ 

‘It worked»!' 

‘Absolutely.’ 

"But how could-?' 

‘It worked.' 

'I don't think I understand what you mean when you say «it worked." 
‘I mean it in the most literal sense.’ 

"But how?’ 

‘It was heart-shaking. Glorious. Torches, dizziness, singing. 


Wolves howling around us and a bull bellowing in the dark. The river ran 
white. It was like a film in fast motion, the moon waxing and waning, clouds 
rushing across the sky. Vines grew from the ground so fast they twined up the 
trees like snakes; seasons passing in the wink of an eye, entire years for all I 
know... I mean we think of phenomenal change as being the very essence of 
time, when it's not at all. Time is something which defies spring and winter, 
birth and decay, the good and the bad, indifferently. Something changeless 
and joyous and absolutely indestructible. Duality ceases to exist; there is no 
ego, no «I,» and yet it's not at all like those horrid comparisons one sometimes 
hears in Eastern religions, the self being a drop of water swallowed by the 
ocean of the universe. It's more as if the universe expands to fill the 
boundaries of the self. You have no idea how pallid the workday boundaries 
of ordinary existence seem, after such an ecstasy. It was like being a baby. I 
couldn't remember my name. The soles of my feet were cut to pieces and I 
couldn't even feel it.’ 


‘But these are fundamentally sex rituals, aren't they?’ 


It came out not as a question but as a statement. He didn't blink, but sat 
waiting for me to continue. 


"Well? Aren't they?’ 


He leaned over to rest his cigarette in the ashtray. 'Of course,’ he said 
agreeably, cool as a priest in his dark suit and ascetic spectacles. 'You know 


that as well as I do.' 
We sat looking at each other for a moment. 
"What exactly did you do?' I said. 


"Well, really, I think we needn't go into that now,’ he said smoothly. 'There 
was a certain carnal element to the proceedings but the phenomenon was 
basically spiritual in nature.’ 


"You saw Dionysus, I suppose?’ 


I had not meant this at all seriously, and I was startled when he nodded as 
casually as if I'd asked him if he'd done his homework. 


"You saw him corporeally! Goatskin? Thyrsus?' 


"How do you know what Dionysus is?’ said Henry, a bit sharply. "What do 
you think it was we saw? A cartoon? A drawing from the side of a vase?’ 


'I just can't believe you're telling me you actually saw ' 


"What if you had never seen the sea before? What if the only thing you'd ever 
seen was a child's picture — blue crayon, choppy waves? Would you know the 
real sea if you only knew the picture? Would you be able to recognize the real 
thing even if you saw it? You don't know what Dionysus looks like. We're 
talking about God here. God is serious business.’ He leaned back in his chair 
and scrutinized me. 'You don't have to take my word for any of this, you 
know,' he said. 'There were four of us. 


Charles had a bloody bite-mark on his arm that he had no idea how he'd got, 
but it wasn't a human bite. Too big. And strange puncture marks instead of 
teeth. Camilla said that during part of it, she'd believed she was a deer; and 
that was odd, too, because the rest of us remember chasing a deer through the 
woods, for miles it seemed. Actually, it was miles. I know that for a fact. 


Apparently we ran and ran and ran, because when we came to ourselves we 
had no idea where we were. Later we figured out that we had got over at least 
four barbed-wire fences, though how I don't know, and were well off Francis's 
property, seven or eight miles into the country. This is where I come to the 
rather unfortunate part of my story. 


'I have only the vaguest memory of this. I heard something behind me, or 
someone, and I wheeled around, almost losing my balance, and swung at 
whatever it was — a large, indistinct, yellow thing — with my closed fist, my 
left, which is not my good one. I felt a terrible pain in my knuckles and then, 


almost instantly, something knocked the breath right out of me. It was dark, 
you understand; I couldn't really see. I swung out again with my right, hard as 
I could and with all my weight behind it, and this time I heard a loud crack 
and a scream. 


"We're not too clear on what happened after that. Camilla was a good deal 
ahead, but Charles and Francis were fairly close behind and had soon caught 
up with me. ,' have a distinct recollection of being on my feet and seeing the 
two of them crash through the bushes — God. I can see them now. Their hair 
was tangled with leaves and mud and their clothes virtually in shreds. 


They stood there, panting, glassy-eyed and hostile — I didn't recognize either 
of them, and I think we might have started to fight had not the moon come 
from behind a cloud. We stared at each other. Things started to come back. I 
looked down at my hand and saw it was covered with blood, and worse than 
blood. 


Then Charles stepped forward and knelt at something at my feet, and I bent 
down, too, and saw that it was a man. He was dead. He was about forty years 
old and he had on a yellow plaid shirt — you know those woolen shirts they 
wear up here — and his neck was broken, and, unpleasant to say, his brains 
were all over his face. Really, I do not know how that happened. There was a 
dreadful mess. I was drenched in blood and there was even blood on my 
glasses. 


‘Charles tells a different story. He remembers seeing me by the body. But he 
says he also has a memory of struggling with something, pulling as hard as he 
could, and all of a sudden becoming aware that what he was pulling at was a 
man's arm, with his foot braced in the armpit. Francis — well, I can't say. 


Every time you talk to him, he remembers something different.’ 
"And Camilla?’ 


Henry sighed. 'I suppose we'll never know what really happened,’ he said. 
"We didn't find her until a good bit later. She was sitting quietly on the bank of 
a stream with her feet in the water, her robe perfectly white, and no blood 
anywhere except for her hair. It was dark and clotted, completely soaked. As 
if she'd tried to dye it red.’ 


"How could that have happened?’ 


"We don't know.' He lit another cigarette. 'Anyway, the man was dead. And 
there we were in the middle of the woods, half-naked and covered with mud 
with this body on the ground in front of us. We were all in a daze. I was 
fading in and out, nearly went to sleep; but then Francis went over for a closer 


look and had a pretty violent attack of the dry heaves. Something about that 
brought me to my senses. I told Charles to find Camilla and then I knelt down 
and went through the man's pockets. 


There wasn't much — I found something or other that had his name on it — but 
of course that wasn't any help. 


'I had no idea what to do. You must remember that it was getting cold, and I 
hadn't slept or eaten for a long time, and my mind wasn't at its clearest. For a 
few minutes — goodness, how confusing this was — I thought of digging a 
grave but then I realized that would be madness. We couldn't linger around all 
night. We didn't know where we were, or who might happen along, or even 
what time it was. Besides, we had nothing to dig a grave with. For a moment I 
nearly panicked — we couldn't just leave the body in the open, could we? — but 
then I realized it was the only thing we could do. My God. We didn't even 
know where the car was. I couldn't picture dragging this corpse over hill and 
dale for goodness knows how long; and even if we got it to the car, where 
would we take it? 


‘So when Charles came back with Camilla, we just left. Which, in retrospect, 
was the smartest thing we could have done. It's not as if teams of expert 
coroners are crawling all over upstate Vermont. It's a primitive place. People 
die violent natural deaths all the time. We didn't even know who the man was; 
there was nothing to tie us to him. All we had to worry about was finding the 
car and then making our way home without anyone seeing us.' He leaned over 
and poured himself some more Scotch. 


"Which is exactly what we did. 


I poured myself another glass, too, and we sat without speaking for a minute 
or more. 


'Henry,' I said at last. 'Good God.' 


He raised an eyebrow. 'Really, it was more upsetting than you can imagine,’ 
he said. ‘Once I hit a deer with my car. It was a beautiful creature and to see it 
struggling, blood everywhere, legs broken... And this was even more 
distressing but at least I thought it was over. I never dreamed we'd hear 
anything else about it.’ He took a drink of his Scotch. 'Unfortunately, that is 
not the case,’ he said. ‘Bunny has seen to that.' 


"What do you mean?’ 
"You saw him this morning. He's driven us half mad over this. 


I am very nearly at the end of my rope. 


There was the sound of a key being turned in the lock. I lenry brought up his 
glass and drank the rest of his whiskey in a long swallow. That'll be Francis,’ 
he said, and turned on the overhead light. 


Chapter 5 ^ 


When the lights came on, and the circle of darkness leapt back into the 
mundane and familiar boundaries of the living room cluttered desk; low, 
lumpy sofa; the dusty and modishly cut draperies that had fallen to Francis 
after one of his mother's decorating purges — it was as if I'd switched on the 
lamp after a long bad dream; blinking, I was relieved to discover that the 
doors and windows were still where they were supposed to be and that the 
furniture hadn't rearranged itself, by diabolical magic, in the dark. 


The bolt turned. Francis stepped in from the dark hall. He was breathing 
hard, pulling with dispirited jerks at the fingertips of a glove. 


‘Jesus, Henry,’ he said. "What a night.’ 


I was out of his line of vision. Henry glanced at me and cleared his throat 
discreetly. Francis wheeled around. 


I thought I looked back at him casually enough, but evidently I didn't. It 
must have been all over my face. 


He stared at me for a long time, the glove half on, half off, dangling limply 
from his hand. 


‘Oh, no,' he said at last, without moving his eyes away from mine. ‘Henry. 
You didn't.’ 


Tm afraid I did,’ Henry said. 
Francis squeezed his eyes tight shut, then reopened them. 


He had got very white, his pallor dry and talcumy as a chalk drawing on 
rough paper. For a moment I wondered if he might faint. 


Tt's all right,’ said Henry. 

Francis didn't move. 

‘Really, Francis,’ Henry said, a trifle peevishly, ‘it's all right. 
Sit down.' 


Breathing hard, he made his way across the room and fell heavily into an 
armchair, where he rummaged in his pocket for a cigarette. 


"He knew,’ said Henry. 'I told you so.' 


Francis looked up at me, the unlit cigarette trembling in his fingertips. "Did 
you?’ 


I didn't answer. For a moment I found myself wondering if this was all some 
monstrous practical joke. Francis dragged a hand down the side of his face. 


'I suppose everybody knows now, he said. 'I don't even know why I feel bad 
about it.’ 


Henry had stepped into the kitchen for a glass. Now he poured some Scotch 
in it and handed it to Francis. 'Deprendi miserum est,' he said. 


To my surprise Francis laughed, a humorless little snort. 
‘Good Lord,' he said, and took a long drink. "What a nightmare. 
I can't imagine what you must think of us, Richard.’ 


It doesn't matter.’ I said this without thinking, but as soon as I had, I realized, 
with something of a jolt, that it was true; it really didn't matter that much, at 
least not in the preconceived way that one would expect. 


"Well, I guess you could say we're in quite a fix,' said Francis, rubbing his 
eyes with thumb and forefinger. 'I don't know what we're going to do with 
Bunny. I wanted to slap him when we were standing in line for that damned 
movie. 


"You took him to Manchester?' Henry said. 


"Yes. But people are so nosy and you never do really know who might be 
sitting behind you, do you? It wasn't even a good movie.’ 


"What was it?’ 


‘Some nonsense about a bachelor party. I just want to take a sleeping pill and 
go to bed.’ He drank off the rest of his Scotch and poured himself another 
inch. ‘Jesus,’ he said to me. "You're being so nice about this. The feel awfully 
embarrassed by this whole thing.’ 


There was a long silence. 
Finally I said: 'What are you going to do?’ 


Francis sighed. 'We didn't mean to do anything,’ he said. 'I know it sounds 
kind of bad, but what can we do about it now?’ 


The resigned note in his voice simultaneously angered and distressed me .7 
don't know,’ I said. "Why for God's sake didn't you go to the police?’ 


‘Surely you're joking,’ said Henry dryly. 


"Tell them you don't know what happened? That you found him lying out in 
the woods? Or, God, I don't know, that you hit him with the car, that he ran 
out in front of you or something?’ 


"That would have been a very foolish thing to do,’ Henry said. 


‘It was an unfortunate incident and I am sorry that it happened, but frankly I 
do not see how well either the taxpayers’ interests or my own would be served 
by my spending sixty or seventy years in a Vermont jail.’ 


"But it was an accident. You said so yourself.’ 
Henry shrugged. 


Tf you'd gone right in, you could've got off on some minor charge. Maybe 
nothing would have happened at all.' 


"Maybe not,' Henry said agreeably. 'But remember, this is Vermont.' 
"What the hell difference does that make?’ 


‘It makes a great deal of difference, unfortunately. If the thing went to trial, 
we'd be tried here. And not, I might add, by a jury of our peers.’ 


'So?' 


'Say what you like, but you can't convince me that a jury box of poverty- 
level Vermonters would have the remotest bit of pity for four college students 
on trial for murdering one of their neighbors.' 


‘People in I lampden have been hoping tor years that something like this 
would happen,’ said Francis, lighting a new cigar ette off the end of the old 
one. 'We wouldn't be getting off on any manslaughter charges. We'd be lucky 
if we didn't go to the chair.’ 


‘Imagine how it would look,’ Henry said. 'We're all young, well educated, 
reasonably well off; perhaps most importantly, not Vermonters. And I suppose 
that any equitable judge might make allowances for our youth, and the fact 
that it was an accident and so forth ' 


‘Four rich college kids?’ said Francis. ‘Drunk? On drugs? On this guy's land 
in the middle of the night?’ 


"You were on his land?' 


"Well, apparently,’ said Henry. "That's where the papers said his body was 
found.’ 


I hadn't been in Vermont very long, but I'd been there long enough to know 
what any Vermonter worth his salt would think of that. Trespassing on 
someone's land was tantamount to breaking into his house. 'Oh, God,’ I said. 


‘That's not the half of it, either,’ said Francis. 'For Christ's sake, we were 
wearing bed sheets. Barefoot. Soaked in blood. 


Stinking drunk. Can you imagine if we'd trailed down to the sheriff's office 
and tried to explain all that'?' 


"Not that we were in any condition to explain,’ Henry said dreamily. 'Really. 
I wonder if you understand what sort of state we were in. Scarcely an hour 
before, we'd all been really, truly out of our minds. And it may be a 
superhuman effort to lose oneself so completely, but that's nothing compared 
to the effort of getting oneself back again. 


It certainly wasn't as if something snapped and there we were, our jolly old 
selves,’ said Francis. ‘Believe me. We might as well have had shock 
treatments. 


T really don't know how we got home without being seen,’ 
Henry said. 


"No way could we have patched together a plausible story from this. Good 
Lord. Tt was weeks before I got over it. Camilla couldn't even talk for three 
days.’ 


With a small chill, I remembered: Camilla, her throat wrapped in a red 
muffler, unable to speak. Laryngitis, they'd said. 


"Yes, that was very strange,’ said Henry. ‘She was thinking clearly enough, 
but the words wouldn't come out right. As if she'd had a stroke. When she 
started to speak again, her high school French came back before her English 
or her Greek. 


Nursery words. I remember sitting by her bed, listening to her count to ten, 
watching her point to lafenetre, la chaise Francis laughed. 'She was so funny,’ 
he said. 'When I asked her how she felt she said, «Je me sens eomme Helene 
Keller, man vieux," 


‘Did she go to the doctor?’ 
‘Are you kidding?’ 
"What if she hadn't got any better?’ 


"Well, the same thing happened to all of us,' said Henry. 'Only it more or less 
wore off in a couple of hours.’ 


"You couldn't talk?’ 
‘Bitten and scratched to pieces?’ Francis said. 'Tongue-tied? 


Half mad? If we'd gone to the police they would have charged us with every 
unsolved death in New England for the last five years.’ He held up an 
imaginary newspaper. ' «Crazed Hippies Indicted for Rural Thrill-Killing.» 


«Cult Slaying of Old Abe So and-So."" 


'Teen Satanists Murder Longtime Vermont Resident,’ said Henry, lighting a 
cigarette. 


Francis started to laugh. 


It would be one thing if we had even a chance at a decent hearing,’ said 
Henry. 'But we don't.’ 


‘And I personally can't imagine much worse than being tried for my life by a 
Vermont circuit-court judge and a jury box full of telephone operators. 


‘Things aren't marvelous,’ said Henry, ‘but they could certainly be worse. The 
big problem now is Bunny.’ 


"What's wrong with him?’ 

"Nothing's wrong with him.' 

Then what's the problem?’ 

"He just can't keep his mouth shut, that's all.’ 
"Haven't you talked to him?’ 

‘About ten million times,’ Francis said. 

‘Has he tried to go to the police?’ 


If he goes on like this,’ said Henry, 'he won't have to. They'll come right to 


us. Reasoning with him does no good. He just doesn't grasp what a serious 
business this is.' 


‘Surely he doesn't want to see you go to jail.’ 


If he thought about it, I'm sure he'd realize he didn't,’ said Henry evenly. 
‘And I'm sure he'd realize that he doesn't particularly want to go to jail 
himself, either.’ 


‘Bunny? But why?’ 


"Because he's known about this since November and he hasn't gone to the 
police,’ Francis said. 


‘But that's beside the point,’ said Henry. 'Even he has sense enough not to 
turn us in. He doesn't have much of an alibi for the night of the murder, and if 
it ever came to prison for the rest of us I think he must know that I, at least, 
would do everything in my power to see he came along with us.' He stubbed 
out his cigarette. 'The problem is he's just a fool, and sooner or later he's going 
to say the wrong thing to the wrong person,’ he said. 


‘Perhaps not intentionally, but I can't pretend to be too concerned with 
motive at this point. You heard him this morning. He'd be in quite a spot 
himself if this got back to the police but of course he thinks those ghastly 
jokes are all terribly subtle and clever and over everyone's head,’ 'He's only 
just smart enough to realize what a mistake turning us in would be, said 
Francis, pausing to pour himself another drink. 'But we can't seem to pound it 
into him that it's even more in his own self-interest not to go around talking 
like he does. And, really, I'm not at nil sure he won't just come out and tell 
someone, when he's in one of these confessional moods.' 


‘Tell someone? Like who?’ 
"Marion. His father. The Dean of Studies.' He shuddered. 


‘Gives me the creeps just to think about it. He's just the sort who always 
stands up in the back of the courtroom during the last five minutes of «Perry 
Mason.» 


‘Bunny Corcoran, Boy Detective,’ said Henry dryly. 
"How did he find out? He wasn't with you, was he?' 


‘As a matter of fact,’ said Francis, 'he was with you.’ He glanced at Henry, 
and to my surprise the two of them began to laugh. 


"What? What's so funny?’ I said, alarmed. 
This sent them into fresh peals of laughter. 'Nothing,' said Francis at last. 
‘Really, it is nothing,’ said Henry, with a bemused little sigh. 


'The oddest things make me laugh these days.’ He lit another cigarette. 'He 
was with you that night, early in the evening, anyway. Remember? You went 
to the movies.’ 


'The Thirty-Nine Steps,’ Francis said. 


With something of a start, I did remember: a windy autumn night, full moon 
obscured by dusty rags of cloud. I'd worked late in the library and hadn't gone 
to dinner. Walking home, a sandwich from the snack bar in my pocket, and 
the dry leaves skittering and dancing on the path before me, I'd run into 
Bunny on his way to the Hitchcock series, which the Film Society was 
showing in the auditorium. 


We were late and there were no seats left so we sat on the carpeted stairs, 
Bunny leaning back on his elbows with his legs stretched in front of him, 
cracking pensively with his rear molars at a little Dum-Dum sucker. The high 
wind rattled the flimsy walls; a door banged open and shut until somebody 
propped it open with a brick. On the screen, locomotives screaming across a 
black-and-white nightmare of iron-bridged chasms. 


"We had a drink afterwards,' I said. 'Then he went to his room.’ 
Henry sighed. 'I wish he had,’ he said. 
"He kept asking if I knew where you were.' 


'He knew himself, very well. We'd threatened half a dozen times to leave 
him at home if he didn't behave. 


‘So he got the bright idea of coming around to Henry's to scare him,' said 
Francis, pouring himself another drink. 


‘I was so angry about that,’ said Henry abruptly. 'Even if nothing had 
happened, it was a sneaky thing to do. He knew where the spare key was, and 
he just got it and let himself in.’ 


‘Even so, nothing might have happened. It was just a horrible string of 
coincidences. If we'd stopped in the country to get rid of our clothes, if we'd 
come here or to the twins’, if Bunny only hadn't fallen asleep 'He was asleep?’ 


"Yes, or otherwise he would have got discouraged and left,’ 


Henry said. "We didn't get back to Hampden until six in the morning. It was a 
miracle we found our way to the car, over all those fields and things in the 
dark... Well, it was foolish to drive to North Hampden in those bloody 
clothes. The police could have pulled us over, we could have had a wreck, 
anything. But I felt ill, and I wasn't thinking clearly, and I suppose I drove to 
my own apartment by instinct.’ 


‘He left my room around midnight.’ 


"Well, then, he was alone in my apartment from about twelve thirty to six a. 
m. And the coroner reckoned the time of death between one and four. That's 
one of the few decent cards fate dealt us in the whole hand. Though Bunny 
wasn't with us, he'd have a hard time proving he wasn't. Unfortunately, that's 
not a card we can play except in the direst circumstances.’ He shrugged. 


‘If only he'd left the lamp on, anything to tip us off.’ 


‘But that was going to be the big surprise, you see. Jumping out at us from 
the dark." 


"We walked in and turned on the light, and then it was too late. He woke up 
instantly. And there we were ' 


‘— all white robes and bloody like something from Edgar Allan Poe,' Francis 
said gloomily. 


‘Jesus, what did he do?’ 

"What do you think? We scared him half to death.’ 
‘It served him right,’ said Henry. 

"Tell him about the ice cream.’ 


‘Really, this was the last straw,’ Henry said crossly. 'He took a quart of ice 
cream out of my freezer to eat while he waited he couldn't bother to get a 
bowl of it, you understand, he had to have the whole quart — and when he fell 
asleep it melted all over him and on my chair and on that nice little Oriental 
rug I used to have. Well. It was quite a good antique, that rug, but the dry 
cleaners said there was nothing they could do. It came back in shreds. And my 
chair.’ He reached for a cigarette. 'He screamed like a banshee when he saw us 


— and he would not shut up,’ said Francis. 'Remember, it was six o'clock in 
the morning, the neighbors sleeping...'! He shook his head. 'I remember 
Charles taking a step towards him, trying to talk to him, and Bunny yelling 


bloody murder. After a minute or two ' 
‘It was only a few seconds,’ Henry said. 


'— after a minute, Camilla picked up a glass ashtray and threw it at him and 
hit him square in the chest.’ 


‘It wasn't a hard blow,’ said Henry thoughtfully, 'but it was quite judiciously 
timed. Instantly he shut up and stared at her and I said to him, «Bunny, shut 
up. You'll wake the neighbors. 


We've hit a deer in the road on the way home." 


‘So then,’ said Francis, 'he wiped his brow and rolled his eyes and went 
through the whole Bunny routine — boy you guys scared me and must've been 
half-asleep and just on and on and on-' 


‘And meanwhile,’ Henry said, 'the four of us were standing there in the 
bloody sheets, the lights on, no curtains, in full view of anyone who might 
happen to drive by. He was talking so loudly, and the lights were so bright, 
and I felt so faint with exhaustion and shock that I couldn't do much more 
than stare at him. My God — we were covered with this man's blood, we'd 
tracked it into the house, the sun was coming up, and here, to top it all off, 
was Bunny. I couldn't force myself to think what to do. Then Camilla, quite 
sensibly, flicked off the light and all of a sudden I realized no matter how it 
looked, no matter who was there, we had to get out of our clothes and wash up 
without losing another second.’ 


'I practically had to rip the sheet off,’ said Francis. The blood had dried and it 
was stuck to me. By the time I'd managed that, Henry and the others were in 
the bathroom. Spray was flying; the water in the bathtub was backed up red; 
rusty splashes on the tile. It was a nightmare.’ 


'I can't tell you how unfortunate it was that Bunny happened to be there,’ said 
Henry, shaking his head. 'But for heaven's sake, we couldn't just stand around 
and wait for him to leave. There was blood everywhere, the neighbors would 
soon be up, for all I knew the police would be pounding at the door any 
second 'Well, it was too bad we alarmed him, but then, it wasn't like we 
thought we were doing this in front of J. Edgar Hoover, either,’ said Francis. 


‘Exactly,’ said Henry. 'I don't want to convey the impression that Bunny's 
presence seemed like a tremendous menace at that point. It was just a 
nuisance, because I knew he wondered what was going on, but at the moment 
he was the least of our troubles. 


If there'd been time, I would have sat him down and explained things to him 


the instant we got in. But there wasn't time.’ 


‘Good God,' Francis said, and shuddered. 'I still can't go in Henry's bathroom. 
Blood smeared on the porcelain. Henry's straight razor swinging from a peg. 
We were bruised and scratched to pieces. 


‘Charles was the worst by far.’ 
‘Oh, my God. Thorns stuck all over him. 
‘And that bite.’ 


"You've never seen anything like it,’ said Francis. 'Four inches around and the 
teeth marks just gouged in. Remember what Bunny said?’ 


Henry laughed. 'Yes,' he said. 'Tell him.’ 


"Well, there we all were, and Charles was turning to get the soap — I didn't 
even know Bunny was there, I suppose he was looking in the door — when all 
of a sudden I heard him say, in this weird businesslike way, «Looks like that 
deer took a plug out of your arm, Charles." 


'He was standing there for part of the time, making comments of various 
sorts,' said Henry, 'but the next thing I knew he wasn't. 


I was disturbed by how suddenly he'd left but glad he was out of the way. 
We had a great deal to do and not too much time.’ 


"Weren't you afraid he'd tell somebody?’ 
Henry looked at me blankly. 'Who?' 
The. Marion. Anybody.’ 


'No. At that point I had no reason to think he'd do anything of the sort. He'd 
been with us on previous tries, you understand, so our appearance didn't seem 
as extraordinary to him as it might have to you. The whole thing was deadly 
secret. He'd been involved in it with us for months. How could he have told 
anyone without explaining the whole thing and making himself look foolish? 
Julian knew what we were trying to do, but I was still pretty certain Bunny 
wouldn't talk to him without checking it with us first. And, as it happened, I 
was right.’ 


He paused and lit a cigarette. 'It was almost daybreak, and things were still a 
dreadful mess — bloody footprints on the porch, the chitons lying where we'd 
dropped them. The twins put on some old clothes of mine and went out to take 
care of the porch and the inside of the car. The chitons, I knew, should be 


burnt, but I didn't want to start a big fire in the back yard; nor did I want to 
burn them inside and risk setting off the fire alarm. My landlady is constantly 
warning me not to use the fireplace, but I'd always suspected it worked. I took 
a chance and as luck would have it, it did.' 


'I was no help at all,’ said Francis. 
"No, you certainly weren't,’ said Henry crossly. 


'I couldn't help it. I thought I was going to throw up. I went back to Henry's 
room and went to sleep.’ 


'I think we all would have liked to go to sleep but somebody had to clean up,’ 
Henry said. 'The twins came in around seven. 


I was still having a terrible time with the bathroom. Charles's back was stuck 
full of thorns like a pincushion. For a while Camilla and I worked on him with 
a pair of tweezers; then I went back in the bathroom to finish up. The worst of 
it was over, but I was so tired I couldn't keep my eyes open. The towels 
weren't so bad — we'd pretty much avoided using them — but there were stains 
on some of them so I put them in the washing machine and dumped in some 
soap. The twins were asleep, on that fold-out bed in the back room, and I 
shoved Charles over and was out like a light.’ 


‘Fourteen hours,’ said Francis. 'I've never slept that long in my life. 
"Nor have I. Like a dead man. No dreams.’ 


T can't tell you how disorienting this was,' Francis said. 'The sun was coming 
up when I went to sleep, and it seemed like I'd just closed my eyes when I 
opened them again, and it was dark, and a phone was ringing, and I had no 
idea where I was. It kept ringing and ringing, and finally I got up and found 
my way into the hall. Somebody said don't answer it but —' 


Tve never seen anybody like you for answering a phone,’ said Henry. 'Even 
in somebody else's house.’ 


"Well, what am I supposed to do? Just let it ring? Anyway, I picked it up, and 
it was Bunny, cheery as a lark. Boy, the four of us had really been messed up, 
and were we turning into a bunch of nudists or what, and how about if we all 
went to the Brasserie.» and had some dinner?’ ™ I sat up in my chair. "Wait,' I 
said. 'Was that the night?’ 


Henry nodded. 'You came too,' he said. 'Remember?' 


‘Of course,’ I said, unaccountably excited that the story was at last beginning 


to dovetail with my own experience. 'Of course. I met Bunny on his way to 
your place.' 


Tf you don't mind my saying so, we were all a little surprised when he 
showed up with you,' said Francis. 


"Well, I suppose eventually he wanted to get us alone and find out what 
happened, but it was nothing that couldn't wait,’ said Henry. "You'll recall that 
our appearance wouldn't have seemed so odd to him as it might. He'd been 
with us before, you know, on nights very nearly as — what is the word I'm 
looking for?’ 


'— when we'd been sick all over the place,’ said Francis, 'and fallen in mud, 
and didn't get home till dawn. There was the blood — he might have wondered 
exactly how we'd killed that deer-but still.’ 


Uncomfortably, I thought of the Bacchae: hooves and bloody ribs, scraps 
dangling from the fir trees. There was a word for it in Greek: omophagia. 
Suddenly it came back to me: walking into Henry's apartment, all those tired 
faces, Bunny's snide greeting of Khairei, deerslayers!' 


They'd been quiet that evening, quiet and pale, though not more than seemed 
remarkable for people suffering particularly bad hangovers. Only Camilla's 
laryngitis seemed unusual. They'd been drunk the night before, they told me, 
drunk as bandicoots; Camilla had left her sweater at home and caught cold on 
the walk back to North Hampden. Outside, it was dark and raining hard. 
Henry gave me the car keys and asked me to drive. 


It was a Friday night, but the weather was so bad the Brasserie was nearly 
deserted. We ate Welsh rarebits and listened to the rain beating down in gusts 
on the roof. Bunny and I drank whiskey and hot water; the others had tea. 


‘Feeling queasy, bakchoi T said Bunny slyly after the waiter took our drink 
orders. 


Camilla made a face at him. 


When we went out to the car after dinner Bunny walked around it, inspected 
the headlights, kicked at the tires. This the one you were in last night?’ he said, 
blinking in the rain. 


'Yes.' 


He brushed the damp hair from his eyes and bent to examine the fender. 
‘German cars,' he said. 'Hate to say it but I think the Krauts have got Detroit 
metal beat. I don't see a scratch.’ 


I asked him what he meant. 


‘Aw, they were driving around drunk. Making a nuisance of themselves on 
the public road. Hit a deer. Did you kill it?' he asked Henry. 


Walking around to the passenger's side, Henry looked up. 
"What's that?’ 

'The deer. Didja kill it?’ 

Henry opened the door. 'It looked pretty dead to me,’ he had said. 


There was a long silence. My eyes were smarting from all the smoke. A 
thick gray haze of it hung near the ceiling. 


‘So what's the problem?’ I said. 
"What do you mean?’ 
"What happened? Did you tell him about it or not?’ 


Henry took a deep breath. 'No,' he said. 'We might have, but obviously the 
fewer people who knew the better. When I first saw him alone, I broached it 
carefully, but he seemed satisfied with the deer story and I let it go at that. If 
he hadn't figured it out on his own there was certainly no reason to tell him. 


The fellow's body was found, an article ran in the Hampden Examiner, no 
problem at all. But then — by some rotten stroke of luck — I suppose in 
Hampden they don't get many stories like this — they published a follow-up 
story two weeks later. 


«Mysterious Death in Battenkill County.» And that was the one Bunny saw.’ 


It was the stupidest thing,’ Francis said. 'He never reads the newspaper. 
None of this would have happened if it wasn't for that blasted Marion. 


‘She has a subscription, something to do with the Early Childhood Center,’ 
said Henry, rubbing his eyes. "Bunny was with her in Commons before lunch. 
She was talking to one of her friends — Marion, that is — and Bunny I suppose 
had got bored and started to read her paper. The twins and I went up to say 
hello and the first thing he said, practically across the room, was «Look here, 
you guys, some chicken farmer got killed out by Francis's house.» 


Then he read a bit of the article out loud. Fractured skull, no murder weapon, 
no motive, no leads. I was trying to think of some way to change the subject 
when he said: «Hey. November tenth? That's the night you guys were out at 


Francis's. The night you ran over that deer.» 
' «I don't see,» I said, «how that could be right.» 


' «It was the tenth. I remember because it was the day before my mom's 
birthday. That's really something, isn't it?» 


' «Why yes,» we said, «it certainly is.» 


' «If I had a suspicious mind,» he said, «I'd guess you'd done it, Henry, 
coming back from Battenkill County that night with blood from head to toe." 


He lit another cigarette. 'You have to remember that it was lunch time, 
Commons was packed, Marion and her friend were listening to every word, 
and besides, you know how his voice carries... We laughed, naturally, and 
Charles said something funny, and we'd just managed to get him off the topic 
when he looked at the paper again. «I can't believe this, guys,» he said. 


«An honest-to-God murder, out in the woods too, not three miles from where 
you were. You know, if the cops had pulled you over that night, you'd 
probably be in jail right now. There's a phone number to call if anybody's got 
any information. If I I wanted to, 1 bet I could get you guys in a heck of a lot 
of trouble...» et cetera, et cetera. 


‘Of course, I didn't know what to think. Was he joking, did he really suspect? 
Eventually I got him to drop it but still I had an awful feeling that he'd felt 
how uneasy he'd made me. He knows me so well — he has a sixth sense about 
that kind of thing. 


And I was uneasy. Goodness. It was right before lunch, all these security 
guards were standing around, half of them are connected with the police force 
in Hampden... I mean, there was no way our story could stand up to even 
peremptory examination and I knew it. Obviously we hadn't hit a deer. There 
wasn't a scratch on either of the cars. And if anyone made even a casual 
connection between us and the dead man... So, as I say, I was glad when he 
dropped it. But even then I had a feeling we hadn't heard the last of it. He 
teased us about it — quite innocently, I believe, but in public as well as private 
— for the rest of the term. You know how he is. Once he gets something like 
that on the brain he won't give it up.’ 


I did know. Bunny had an uncanny ability to ferret out topics of conversation 
that made his listener uneasy and to dwell upon them with ferocity once he 
had. In all the months I'd known him he'd never ceased to tease me, for 
instance, about that jacket I'd worn to lunch with him that first day, and about 
what he saw as my flimsy and tastelessly Californian style of dress. To an 
impartial eye, my clothes were in fact not at all dissimilar from his own but 


his snide remarks upon the subject were so inexhaustible and tireless, I think, 
because in spite of my good-natured laughter he must have been dimly aware 
that he was touching a nerve, that I was in fact incredibly self-conscious about 
these virtually imperceptible differences of dress and of the rather less 
imperceptible differences of manner and bearing between myself and the rest 
of them. I am gifted at blending myself into any given milieu — you've never 
seen such a typical California teenager as I was, nor such a dissolute and 
callous pre-med student — but somehow, despite my efforts, I am never able to 
blend myself in entirely and remain in some respects quite distinct from my 
surroundings, in the same way that a green chameleon remains a distinct 
entity from the green leaf upon which it sits, no matter how perfectly it has 
approximated the subtleties of the particular shade. Whenever Bunny, rudely 
and in public, accused me of wearing a shirt which contained a polyester 
blend, or remarked critically that my perfectly ordinary trousers, 
indistinguishable from his own, bore the taint of something he called a 
"Western cut,’ a large portion of the pleasure this sport afforded him was 
derived from his unerring and bloodhoundish sense that this, of all topics, was 
the one which made me most truly uncomfortable. He could not have failed to 
notice what a sore spot his mention of the murder had touched in Henry; nor, 
once he sensed its existence, could he have restrained himself from continuing 
to jab at it. 


‘Of course, he didn't know a thing,' Francis said. 'Really, he didn't. It was all 
a big joke to him. He liked to throw out references to that farmer we'd gone 
and murdered, just to see me jump. One day he told me he'd seen a policeman 
out in front of my house, asking my landlady questions.’ 


‘He did that to me, too,’ said Henry. 'He was always joking about calling the 
tips number in the newspaper, and the five of us splitting the reward money. 
Picking up the telephone. 


Pretending to dial.’ 
"You can understand how thin that wore after a time. My God. 


Some of the things he said in front of you — The terrible thing was, you could 
never tell when it was coming. Right before school let out he stuck a copy of 
that newspaper article under the windshield wiper of my car. «Mysterious 
Death in Battenkill County.» It was horrible to know that he'd saved it in the 
first place, and kept it all that time.’ 


"Worst of all,’ said Henry, 'there was absolutely nothing we could do. For a 
while we even thought of telling him outright, throwing ourselves on his 
mercy so to speak, but then we I realized, at that late date, it was impossible to 
predict how he'd react. He was grouchy, and sick, and worried about his 


grades. 


And the term was nearly over too. It seemed that the best thing to do was to 
stay on his good side until the Christmas break take him places, buy him 
things, pay a lot of attention to him and hope it would blow over during the 
winter.' He sighed. 'At the end of virtually every school term I've been through 
with Bunny, he's suggested that the two of us go on a trip, meaning by this 
that we go to some place of his choosing and that I pay for it. He hasn't the 
money to get to Manchester on his own. 


And when the subject came up, as I knew it would, about a week or two 
before school was out, I thought: why not? In this way, at least, one of us 
could keep an eye on him over the winter; and perhaps a change of scenery 
might prove beneficial. I should also note that it didn't seem to be such a bad 
thing if he were to feel a bit under obligation to me. He wanted to go to either 
Italy or Jamaica. I knew I couldn't bear Jamaica, so I bought two tickets for 
Rome and arranged for some rooms not far from the Piazza di Spagna.' 


"And you gave him money for clothes and all those useless Italian books." 


"Yes. All in all it was a considerable outlay of money but it seemed like a 
good investment. I even thought it might be a bit of fun. But never, in my 
wildest dreams... Really, I don't know where to begin. I remember when he 
saw our rooms — actually, they were quite charming, with a frescoed ceiling, 
beautiful old balcony, glorious view, I was rather proud of myself for having 
found them — he was incensed, and began to complain that it was shabby, that 
it was too cold and the plumbing was bad; and, in short, that the place was 
completely unsuitable and he wondered how I had been duped into taking it. 
He'd thought I knew better than to stumble into a lousy tourist trap, but he 
guessed that he was wrong. He insinuated that our throats would be cut in the 
night. At that point, I was more amenable to his whims. I asked him, if he 
didn't like the rooms, where would he prefer to stay? and he suggested why 
didn't we just go down and get a suite — not a room, you understand, but a 
suite — in the Grand Hotel? 


‘He kept on, and finally I told him we would do nothing of the sort. For one 
thing, the exchange rate was bad and the rooms — besides being paid in 
advance, and with my money — were already rather more than I could afford. 
He sulked for days, feigning asthma attacks, moping around and honking at 
his inhaler and nagging me constantly — accusing me of being cheap, and so 
forth, and when he traveled he liked to do it right — and finally I lost my 
temper. I told him that if the rooms were satisfactory to me, they were 
certainly better than what he was used to — I mean, my God, it was a palazzo, 
it belonged to a countess, I'd paid a fortune for it — and, in short, there was no 
possibility of my paying 500,000 lire a night for the company of American 


tourists and a couple of sheets of hotel stationery. 


'So we stayed on at the Piazza di Spagna, which he proceeded to transform 
into a living Hell. He needled me ceaselessly — about the carpet, about the 
pipes, about what he felt was his insufficient supply of pocket money. We 
were living just a few steps from the Via Condotti, the most expensive 
shopping street in Rome. ,' was lucky, he said. No wonder I was having such a 
good time, since I could buy whatever I wanted, while all he could do was lie 
wheezing in the garret like a poor stepchild. I did what I could to placate him, 
but the more I bought him, the more he wanted. 


Besides which, he would hardly let me out of his sight. He complained if I 
left him alone for even a few minutes; but if I asked him to come along with 
me, to a museum or a church my God, we were in Rome — he was dreadfully 
bored and kept at me constantly to leave. It got so I couldn't even read a book 
without his sailing in. Goodness. He'd stand outside the door and jabber at me 
while I was having my bath. I caught him going through my suitcase. I mean' 
— he paused delicately — 'it's slightly annoying to have even an unobtrusive 
person sharing such close quarters with one. Perhaps I'd only forgotten what it 
was like when we lived together freshman year, or perhaps I've simply 
become more accustomed to living alone, but after a week or two of this I was 
a nervous wreck. I could hardly bear the sight of him. And I was worried 
about other things as well. You know, don't you,’ he said abruptly to me, ‘that 
sometimes I get headaches, rather bad ones?’ 


I did know. Bunny — fond of recounting his own illnesses and those of others 
— had described them in an awed whisper: Henry, flat on his back in a dark 
room, ice packs on his head and a handkerchief tied over his eyes. 


'I don't get them so often as I once did. When I was thirteen or fourteen I had 
them all the time. But now it seems that when they do come — sometimes only 
once a year — they're much worse. And after I'd been a few weeks in Italy, I 
felt one coming on. Unmistakable. Noises get louder; objects shimmer; my 
peripheral vision darkens and I see all sorts of unpleasant things hovering at 
its edges. There's a terrible pressure in the air. I'll look at a street sign and not 
be able to read it, not understand the simplest spoken sentence. There's not 
much that can be done when it comes to that but I did what I could — stayed in 
my room with the shades pulled, took medicine, tried to keep quiet. At last I 
realized I would have to cable my doctor in the States. The drugs they give me 
are too powerful to dispense in prescription form; generally I go to the 
emergency room for a shot. I wasn't sure what an Italian doctor would do if I 
showed up gasping at his office, an American tourist, asking for an injection 
of phenobarbital. 


‘But by then it was too late. The headache was on me in a matter of hours 


and after that, I was quite incapable either of finding my way to a doctor or 
making myself understood if I had. I don't know if Bunny tried to get me one 
or not. His Italian is so bad that when he tried to speak to anyone he would 
generally just end up insulting them. The American Express office was not far 
from where we lived, and I'm sure they could have given him the name of an 
English-speaking doctor, but of course that's not the sort of thing that would 
occur to Bunny. 


'I hardly know what happened for the next few days. I lay in my room with 
the shades down and sheets of newspaper taped over the shades. It was 
impossible even to have any ice sent up — all one could get were lukewarm 
pitchers of acqua semplice but then I had a hard time talking in English, much 
less Italian. 


God knows where Bunny was. I have no memory of seeing him, nor much of 
anything else. 


"Anyway. For a few days I lay flat on my back, hardly able to blink without 
feeling like my forehead was splitting open, and everything sick and black. I 
swung in and out of consciousness until finally I became aware of a thin seam 
of light burning at the edge of the shade. How long I'd been looking at it I 
don't know, but gradually I became aware that it was morning, that the pain 
had receded somewhat, and that I could move around without awful difficulty. 
I also realized that I was extraordinarily thirsty. 


There was no water in my pitcher, so I got up and put on my dressing gown 
and went to get a drink. 


"My room and Bunny's opened from opposite ends to a rather grand central 
room — fifteen-foot ceilings, with a fresco in the manner of Carracci; glorious 
sculptured-stuccoed framework; French doors leading to the balcony. I was 
almost blinded by the morning light, but I made out a shape which I took to be 
Bunny, bent over some books and papers at my desk. I waited until my eyes 
cleared, one hand on the doorknob to steady myself, and then I said, «Good 
morning, Bun.» 


"Well, he leapt up as if he'd been scalded, and scrabbled in the papers as if to 
hide something, and all of a sudden I realized what he had. I went over and 
snatched it from him. It was my diary. 


He was always nosing around trying to get a look at it; I'd hidden it behind a 
radiator but I suppose he'd come digging in my room while I was ill. He'd 
found it once before, but since 1 write in Latin I dnn't suppose he was able to 
make much sense of it. I didn't even use his real name. Cuniculus molestus, I 
thought, denoted him quite well. And he'd never figure that out without a 


lexicon. 


"Unfortunately, while I was ill, he'd had ample chance to avail himself of 
one. A lexicon, that is. And I know we make fun of Bunny for being such a 
dreadful Latinist, but he'd managed to eke out a pretty competent little English 
translation of the more recent entries. I must say, I never dreamed he was 
capable of such a thing. It must have taken him days. 


‘I wasn't even angry. I was too stunned. I stared at the translation — it was 
sitting right there — and then at him, and then, all of a sudden, he pushed back 
his chair and began to bellow at me. 


We had killed that fellow, he said, killed him in cold blood and didn't even 
bother to tell him about it, but he knew there was something fishy all along, 
and where did I get off calling him Rabbit, and he had half a mind to go right 
down to the American consulate and have them send over some police... 
Then — this was foolish of me — I slapped him in the face, hard as I could.’ 


He sighed. 'I shouldn't have done that. I didn't even do it from anger, but 
frustration. I was sick and exhausted; I was afraid someone would hear him; I 
just didn't think I could stand it another second. 


‘And I'd hit him harder than I meant to. His mouth fell open. 


My hand had left a big white mark across his cheek. All of a sudden the 
blood rushed back into it, bright red. He began to shout at me, cursing, quite 
hysterical, throwing wild punches at me. There were rapid footsteps on the 
stairs, followed by a loud banging at the door and a delirious burst of Italian. I 
grabbed the diary and the translation and threw them in the stove — Bunny 
went for them, but I held him back until they started to go up and then I yelled 
for whoever it was to come in. It was the chambermaid. She flew into the 
room, screaming in Italian so fast I couldn't understand a word she said. At 
first I thought she was angry about the noise. Then I understood it wasn't it at 
all. 


She'd known I was ill; there'd been hardly a sound from the room for days 
and then, she said excitedly, she'd heard all the screaming; she had thought I'd 
died in the night, perhaps, and the other young signer had found me, but as I 
was standing now in front of her, that was obviously not the case; did I need a 
doctor? An ambulance? Bicarbonate di soda? 


'I thanked her and said no, I was perfectly all right, and then I sort of dunque- 
dunqued around, trying to think of some explanation for the disturbance, but 
she seemed perfectly satisfied and went away to fetch our breakfast. Bunny 
looked rather stunned. 


He had no idea what it had been about, of course. I suppose it seemed rather 
sinister and inexplicable. He asked me where she was going, and what she'd 
said, but I was too sick and angry to answer. I went back to my bedroom and 
shut the door, and stayed there until she came back with our breakfast. She 
laid it out on the terrace, and we went outside to eat. 


‘Curiously, Bunny had little to say. After a bit of a tense silence, he inquired 
about my health, told me what he'd done while I was ill, and said nothing 
about what had just happened. I ate my breakfast, and realized all I could do 
was try to keep my head. I had hurt his feelings, I knew — really, there were 
several very unkind things in the diary — so I resolved to be as pleasant to him 
from then on out as I could, and to hope no more problems would arise.’ 


He paused to take a drink of his whiskey. I looked at him. 
"You mean, you thought problems might not arise?’ I said. 
'I know Bunny better than you do,’ Henry said crossly. 
"But what about what he said — about the police?’ 

'I knew he wasn't prepared to go to the police, Richard.’ 


‘Tf it were simply a question of the dead man, things would be different, don't 
you see?’ said Francis, leaning forward in his chair. 'It's not that his conscience 
bothers him. Or that he feels any compelling kind of moral outrage. He thinks 
he's been somehow wronged by the whole business.’ 


"Well, frankly, I thought I was doing him a favor by not telling him,’ Henry 
said. 'But he was angry — is angry, I should say because things were kept from 
him. He feels injured. Excluded. 


And my best chance was to try to make amends for that. We're old friends, 
he and I.’ 


‘Tell him about those things Bunny bought with your credit cards while you 
were sick. 


'I didn't find out about that until later,’ said Henry gloomily. 
‘It doesn't make much difference now.’ He lit another cigarette. 


'I suppose, right after he found out, he was in a kind of shock,' he said. 'And, 
too, he was in a strange country, unable to speak the language, without a cent 
of his own. He was all right for a little while. Nonetheless, once he caught on 
to the fact — and it didn't take him long — that, circumstances to the contrary, I 


was actually pretty much at his mercy, you can't imagine what torture he put 
me through. He talked about it all the time. In restaurants, in shops, in 
taxicabs. Of course, it was the off season, and not many English around, but 
for all I know there are entire families of Americans back home in Ohio 
wondering if... Oh, God. 


Exhaustive monologues in the Hosteria dell'Orso. An argument in the Via 
dei Cestari. An abortive re-enactment of it in the lobby of the Grand Hotel. 


‘One afternoon at a cafe, he was going on and on and I noticed that a man at 
the next table was hanging on every word. We got up to leave. He got up too. 
I wasn't sure what to think. I knew he was German, because I'd heard him 
talking to the waiter, but I had no idea if he had any English or if he'd been 
able to hear Bunny distinctly enough to understand. Perhaps he was only a 
homosexual, but I didn't want to take any chances. I led the way home through 
the alleys, turning this way and that, and I felt quite certain we'd lost him but 
apparently not, because when I woke up the next morning and looked out the 
window he was standing by the fountain. Bunny was elated. He thought it was 
just like a spy picture. He wanted to go out and see if this fellow would try to 
follow us, and I had practically to restrain him by force. All morning I 
watched from the window. The German stood around, had a few cigarettes, 
and drifted away after a couple of hours; but it wasn't until about four o'clock 
when Bunny, who'd been complaining steadily since noon, began to raise such 
a ruckus that we finally went to get something to eat. But we were only a few 
blocks from the piazza when I thought I saw the German again, walking 
behind us at quite a distance. I turned and started back, in hopes of 
confronting him; he disappeared, but in a few minutes I turned around and he 
was there again. 


Td been worried before, but then I began to feel really afraid. 


Immediately we went off into a side street, and made our way home by a 
roundabout route — Bunny never did get his lunch that day, he almost drove 
me crazy — and I sat by the window until it got dark, telling Bunny to shut up 
and trying to think what to do. I didn't think he knew exactly where we lived 
otherwise, why roam around the piazza, why not come directly to our 
apartment if he had something to say? At any rate. We . left our rooms pretty 
much in the middle of the night and checked into the Excelsior, which was 
fine with Bunny. Room service, you know. I watched quite anxiously for the 
German the rest of my time in Rome — goodness, I dream about him still — but 
I never saw him again.’ 


"What do you suppose he wanted? Money?’ 


Henry shrugged. 'Who knows. Unfortunately at that point I had very little 


money to give him. Bunny's jaunts to the tailors and so forth had just about 
cleaned me out, and then having to move to this hotel —1 didn't care about the 
money, really I didn't, but he was nearly driving me crazy. Never once was I 
alone. It was impossible to write a letter or even to make a telephone call 
without Bunny lurking somewhere in the background, arrectis auribus, trying 
to listen in. While I was having a bath, he'd go in my room and root through 
my things; I'd come out to find my clothes all wadded up in the bureau and 
crumbs in the pages of my notebooks. Everything I did made him suspicious. 


'I stood it as long as I could but I was beginning to feel desperate and, 
frankly, rather unwell too. I knew that leaving him in Rome might be 
dangerous but it seemed every day that things got worse and eventually it 
became obvious that staying on was no solution. Already I knew that the four 
of us could under no circumstances go back to school as usual in the spring — 
though look at us now — and that we'd have to devise a plan, probably a rather 
Pyrrhic and unsatisfactory one. But I needed time, and quiet, and a few weeks' 
grace period in the States if I was to do anything of the sort. So one night at 
the Excelsior when Bunny was drunk and sleeping soundly I packed my 
clothes — leaving him his ticket home and two thousand American dollars and 
no note — and took a taxi to the airport and got on the first plane home.’ 


"You left him two thousand dollars?’ I said, aghast. 


Henry shrugged. Francis shook his head and snorted. 'That's nothing,’ he 
said. 


I stared at them. 


‘Really, it is nothing,’ said Henry mildly. 'I can't tell you how much that trip 
to Italy cost me. And my parents are generous, but they're not that generous. 
I've never had to ask for money in my life until the last few months. As it is, 
my savings are virtually gone and I don't know how much longer I can keep 
feeding them these stories about elaborate car repairs and so forth. I mean, I 
was prepared to be reasonable with Bunny, but he doesn't seem to understand 
that after all I'm just a student on an allowance and not some bottomless well 
of money... And the horrible thing is, I don't see an end to it. I don't know 
what would happen if my parents got disgusted and cut me off, which is 
extremely likely to happen at some point in the near future if things go on as 
they are.’ 


"He's blackmailing you?’ 
Henry and Francis looked at earh other. 


"Well, not exactly,’ said Francis. 


Henry shook his head. ‘Bunny doesn't think of it in those terms,’ he said 
wearily. "You'd have to know his parents to understand. What the Corcorans 
did with their sons was to send them all to the most expensive schools they 
could possibly get into, and let them fend for themselves once they were 
there. His parents don't give him a cent. Apparently they never have. He told 
me when they sent him off to Saint Jerome's they didn't even give him money 
for his schoolbooks. Rather an odd child-rearing method, in my opinion — like 
certain reptiles who hatch their young and abandon them to the elements. Not 
surprisingly, this has inculcated in Bunny the notion that it is more honorable 
to live by sponging off other people than it is to work.’ 


"But I thought his folks were supposed to be such bluebloods,' 
I said. 


'The Corcorans have delusions of grandeur. The problem is, they lack the 
money to back them up. No doubt they think it very aristocratic and grand, 
farming their sons off on other people.' 


'He's shameless about it, said Francis. ‘Even with the twins, and they're 
nearly as poor as he is.’ 


'The bigger the sums, the better, and never a thought of paying it back. Of 
course, he'd rather die than get a job.' 


'The Corcorans would rather see him dead,' said Francis sourly, lighting his 
cigarette and coughing as he exhaled. 'But this squeamishness about work 
wears a bit thin when one is forced to assume his upkeep oneself.’ 


‘It's unthinkable,’ said Henry. Td rather have any job, six jobs, than beg from 
people. Look at you,’ he said to me. "Your parents aren't particularly generous 
with you, are they? But you're so scrupulous about not borrowing money that 
it's rather silly.’ 


I said nothing, embarrassed. 


'I leavens. I think you might have died in that warehouse rather than wire one 
of us for a couple of hundred dollars.’ He lit a cigarette and blew out an 
emphatic plume of smoke. "That's an infinitesimal sum. I'm sure we shall have 
spent two or three rimes that on Bunny by the end of next week, I stared. 
"You're kidding,’ I said. 


'I wish I were.’ 


'I don't mind lending money either,’ Francis said, ‘if I've got it. But Bunny 
borrows beyond all reason. Even in the old days he thought nothing of asking 


for a hundred dollars at the drop of a hat, for no reason at all.' 


‘And never a word of thanks,’ said Henry irritably. 'What can he spend it on? 
If he had even a shred of self-respect he'd go down to the employment office 
and get himself a job.' 


"You and I may be down there in a couple of weeks if he doesn't let up,’ said 
Francis glumly, pouring himself another glass of Scotch and sloshing a good 
deal of it on the table. 'I've spent thousands on him. Thousands,’ he said to me, 
taking a careful sip from the trembling brim of his glass. 'And most of it on 
restaurant bills, the pig. It's all very friendly, why don't we go out to dinner 
and that sort of thing, but the way things are, how can I say no? 


My mother thinks I'm on drugs. I don't suppose there's much else she can 
think. She's told my grandparents not to give me any money and since January 
I haven't gotten a damn thing except my dividend check. Which is fine as far 
as it goes, but I can't be taking people out for hundred-dollar dinners every 
night.' 


Henry shrugged. 'He's always been like this,' he said. ‘Always. 


He's amusing; I liked him; I felt a little sorry for him. What was it to me, to 
lend him money for his schoolbooks and know he wouldn't pay it back?’ 


"Except now,’ Francis said, ‘it's not just money for schoolbooks. 
And now we can't say no.' 

"How long can you keep this up?’ 

"Not forever.’ 

‘And when the money's gone?’ 


'I don't know,' said Henry, reaching up behind his spectacles to rub his eyes 
again. 


"Maybe I could talk to him. 


'No,' said Henry and Francis, one on top of the other, with an alacrity that 
surprised me. 


"Why-?' 
There was an awkward pause, finally broken by Francis. 


"Well, you may or may not know this,' he said, 'but Bunny is a little jealous 


of you. Already he thinks we've all ganged up on him. If he gets the 
impression you're siding with the rest of us...» 


"You mustn't let on you know,’ said Henry. 'Ever. Unless you want to make 
things worse.’ 


For a moment no one spoke. The apartment was blue with smoke, through 
which the broad expanse of white linoleum was arctic, surreal. Music from a 
neighbor's stereo was filtering through the walls. The Grateful Dead. Good 
Lord. 


‘It's a terrible thing, what we did,’ said Francis abruptly. 'I mean, this man 
was not Voltaire we killed. But still. It's a shame. 


I feel bad about it.’ 


"Well, of course, I do too,’ said Henry matter-of-factly. ‘But not bad enough 
to want to go to jail for it.’ 


Francis snorted and poured himself another shot of whiskey and drank it 
straight off. 'No,' he said. 'Not that bad. 


No one said anything for a moment. I felt sleepy, ill, as if this were some 
lingering and dyspeptic dream. I had said it before, but I said it again, mildly 
surprised at the sound of my own voice in the quiet room. 'What are you going 
to do?’ 


'I don't know what we're going to do,’ said Henry, as calmly as if I'd asked 
him his plans for the afternoon. 


"Well, I know what I'm going to do,' said Francis. He stood up unsteadily and 
pulled with his forefinger at his collar. Startled, I looked at him, and he 
laughed at my surprise. 


'I want to sleep,’ he said, with a melodramatic roll of his eye, ' «dormir plutot 
que vivre»!' 


' «Clans un sommeil aussi doux que la man...'» said Henry with a smile. 


‘Jesus, Henry, you know everything,’ said Francis, 'you make me sick.’ He 
turned unsteadily, loosening his tie as he did it, and swayed out of the room. 


'I believe he is rather drunk,' said Henry, as a door slammed somewhere and 
we heard taps running furiously in the bathroom. 


It's early still. Do you want to play a hand or two of cards?’ 


I blinked at him. 


He reached over and got a deck of cards from a box on the end table — 
Tiffany cards, with sky-blue backs and Francis's monogram on them in gold — 
and began to shuffle through them expertly. 'We could play bezique, or euchre 
if you'd rather,’ he said, the blue and gold dissolving from his hands in a blur. 
'I like poker myself- of course, it's rather a vulgar game, and no fun at all with 
two — but still, there's a certain random element in it which appeals to me.’ 


I looked at him, at his steady hands, the whirring cards, and suddenly an odd 
memory leapt to mind: Tojo, at the height of the war, forcing his top aides to 
sit up and play cards with him all night long. 


He pushed the deck over to me. 'Do you want to cut?’ he said, and lit a 
cigarette. 


I looked at the cards, and then at the flame of the match burning with an 
unwavering clarity between his fingers. 


"You're not too worried about this, are you?’ I said. 


Henry drew deeply on the cigarette, exhaled, shook out the match. 'No,' he 
said, looking thoughtfully at the thread of smoke that curled from the burnt 
end. 'I can get us out of it, I think. 


But that depends on the exact opportunity presenting itself and for that we'll 
have to wait. I suppose it also depends to a certain extent on how much, in the 
end, we are willing to do. Shall I deal’ 


' he said, and he reached for the cards again. 


I awoke from a heavy, dreamless sleep to find myself lying on Francis's 
couch in an uncomfortable position, and the morning sun streaming through 
the bank of windows at the rear. For a while I lay motionless, trying to 
remember where I was and how I had come to be there; it was a pleasant 
sensation which was abruptly soured when I recalled what had happened the 
night before. I sat up and rubbed the waffled pattern the sofa cushion had left 
on my cheek. The movement made my head ache. I stared at the overflowing 
ashtray, the three-quarters-empty bottle of Famous Grouse, the game of poker 
solitaire laid out upon the table. So it had all been real; it wasn't a dream. 


I was thirsty. I went to the kitchen, my footsteps echoing in the silence, and 
drank a glass of water standing at the sink. It was seven a. m. by the kitchen 
clock. 


I filled my glass again and took it to the living room with me and sat on the 


couch. As I drank, more slowly this time — bolting the first glass had made me 
slightly sick — I looked at Henry's solitaire poker game. He must have laid it 
out while I was asleep. 


Instead of going all out for flushes in the columns, and full houses and fours 
on the rows, which was the prudent thing to do in this game, he'd tried for a 
couple of straight flushes on the rows and missed. Why had he done that? To 
see if he could beat the odds? 


Or had he only been tired? 


I picked up the cards and shuffled them and laid them out again one by one, 
in accordance with the strategic rules that he himself had taught me, and beat 
his score by fifty points. The cold, jaunty faces stared back at me: jacks in 
black and red, the Queen of Spades with her fishy eye. Suddenly a wave of 
fatigue and nausea shuddered over me, and I went to the closet, got my coat, 
and left, closing the door quietly behind me. 


The hall, in the morning light, had the feel of a hospital corridor. Pausing 
unsteadily on the stairs, I looked back at Francis's door, indistinguishable 
from the others in the long faceless row. 


I suppose if I had a moment of doubt at all it was then, as I stood in that cold, 
eerie stairwell looking back at the apartment from which I had come. Who 
were these people? How well did I know them? Could I trust any of them, 
really, when it came right down to it? Why, of all people, had they chosen to 
tell me? 


It's funny, but thinking back on it now, I realize that this particular point in 
time, as I stood there blinking in the deserted hall, was the one point at which 
I might have chosen to do something very different from what I actually did. 
But of course I didn't see this crucial moment then for what it was; I suppose 
we never do. Instead, I only yawned, and shook myself from the momentary 
daze that had come upon me, and went on my way down the stairs. 


Back in my room, dizzy and exhausted, I wanted more than anything to pull 
the shades and lie down on my bed — which seemed suddenly the most 
enticing bed in the world, musty pillow, dirty sheets, and all. But that was 
impossible. Greek Prose Composition was in two hours, and I hadn't done my 
homework. 


The assignment was a two-page essay, in Greek, on any epigram of 
Callimachus that we chose. I'd done only a page and I started to hurry through 
the rest in impatient and slightly dishonest fashion, writing out the English 
and translating word by word. It was something Julian asked us not to do. The 
value of Greek prose composition, he said, was not that it gave one any 


particular facility in the language that could not be gained as easily by other 
methods but that if done properly, off the top of one's head, it taught one to 
think in Greek. One's thought patterns become different, he said, when forced 
into the confines of a rigid and unfamiliar tongue. Certain common ideas 
become inexpressible; other, previously undreamt-of ones spring to life, I 
finding miraculous new articulation. By necessity, I suppose, it is j difficult for 
me to explain in English exactly what 1 mean. I can ™ only say that an 
incendium is in its nature entirely different from the feu with which a 
Frenchman lights his cigarette, and both are very different from the stark, 
inhuman pur that the Greeks knew, the pur that roared from the towers of 
Iion or leapt and screamed on that desolate, windy beach, from the funeral 
pyre of Patroklos. 


Pur: that one word contains for me the secret, the bright, terrible clarity of 
ancient Greek. How can I make you see it, this strange harsh light which 
pervades Homer's landscapes and illumines the dialogues of Plato, an alien 
light, inarticulable in our common tongue? Our shared language is a language 
of the intricate, the peculiar, the home of pumpkins and ragamuffins and 
bodkins and beer, the tongue of Ahab and Falstaff and Mrs Gamp; and while I 
find it entirely suitable for reflections such as these, it fails me utterly when I 
attempt to describe in it what I love about Greek, that language innocent of all 
quirks and cranks; a language obsessed with action, and with the joy of seeing 
action multiply from action, action marching relentlessly ahead and with yet 
more actions filing in from either side to fall into neat step at the rear, in a 
long straight rank of cause and effect toward what will be inevitable, the only 
possible end. 


In a certain sense, this was why I felt so close to the others in the Greek 
class. They, too, knew this beautiful and harrowing landscape, centuries dead; 
they'd had the same experience of looking up from their books with fifth- 
century eyes and finding the world disconcertingly sluggish and alien, as if it 
were not their home. It was why I admired Julian, and Henry in particular. 


Their reason, their very eyes and ears were fixed irrevocably in the confines 
of those stern and ancient rhythms — the world, in fact, was not their home, at 
least not the world as I knew it — and far from being occasional visitors to this 
land which I myself knew only as an admiring tourist, they were pretty much 
its permanent residents, as permanent as I suppose it was possible for them to 
be. Ancient Greek is a difficult language, a very difficult language indeed, and 
it is eminently possible to study it all one's life and never be able to speak a 
word; but it makes me smile, even today, to think of Henry's calculated, 
formal English, the English of a welleducated foreigner, as compared with the 
marvelous fluency and self-assurance of his Greek — quick, eloquent, 
remarkably witty. It was always a wonder to me when I happened to hear him 
and Julian conversing in Greek, arguing and joking, as I never once heard 


either of them do in English; many times, I've seen Henry pick up the 
telephone with an irritable, cautious ‘Hello,’ and may I never forget the harsh 
and irresistible delight of his 'Khairei!' when Julian happened to be at the 
other end. 


1 was a bit uncomfortable — after the story I'd just heard — with the 
Callimachean epigrams having to do with flushed cheeks, and wine, and the 
kisses of fair-limbed youths by torchlight. I'd chosen instead a rather sad one, 
which in English runs as follows: 'At morn we buried Melanippus; as the sun 
set the maiden Basilo died by her own hand, as she could not endure to lay her 
brother on the pyre and live; and the house beheld a twofold woe, and all 
Gyrene bowed her head, to see the home of happy children made desolate.’ 


I finished my composition in less than an hour. After I'd gone through it and 
checked the endings, I washed my face and changed my shirt and went, with 
my books, over to Bunny's room. 


Of the six of us, Bunny and I were the only two who lived on campus, and 
his house was across the lawn on the opposite end of Commons. He had a 
room on the ground floor, which I am sure was inconvenient for him since he 
spent most of his time upstairs in the house kitchen: ironing his pants, 
rummaging through the refrigerator, leaning out the window in his 
shirtsleeves to yell at passers-by. When he didn't answer his door I I went to 
look for him there, and I found him sitting in the ^ windowsill in his 
undershirt, drinking a cup of coffee and leafing through a magazine. I was a 
little surprised to see the twins there, too: Charles, standing with his left ankle 
crossed over his right, stirring moodily at his coffee and looking out the 
window; Camilla — and this surprised me, because Camilla wasn't much of 
one for domestic tasks — ironing one of Bunny's shirts. 


‘Oh, hello, old man,’ said Bunny. 'Come on in. Having a little kaffeeklatsch. 
Yes, women are good for one or two things,’ he added, when he saw me 
looking at Camilla and the ironing board, ‘though, being a gentleman’ — he 
winked broadly — 'I don't like to say what the other thing is, mixed company 
and all. 


Charles, get him a cup of coffee, would you? No need to wash it, it's clean 
enough,’ he said stridently, as Charles got a dirty cup from the drain board and 
turned on the tap. 'Do your prose composition?’ 


"Yeah. 
"Which epigram?' 


"Twenty-two. ' 


"Hmn. Sounds like everybody went for the tearjerkers. Charles did that one 
about the girl who died, and all her friends missed her, and you, Camilla, you 
picked ' 


‘Fourteen,’ said Camilla, without looking up, pressing rather savagely on the 
collar band with the tip of the iron. 


"Hah. I picked one of the racy ones myself. Ever been to France, Richard?’ 
'No,' I said. 

"Then you better come with us this summer.’ 

"Us? Who?! 

"Henry and me.' 

I was so taken aback that all I could do was blink at him. 

‘France?’ I said. 


"May wee. Two-month tour. A real doozy. Have a look.' He tossed me the 
magazine, which I now saw was a glossy brochure. 


I glanced through it. It was a lollapalooza of a tour, all right a ‘luxury hotel 
harge cruise’ which began in the Champagne country and then went, via hot 
air balloon, to Burgundy for more barging, through Beaujolais, to the Riviera 
and Cannes and Monte Carlo — it was lavishly illustrated, full of brightly 
colored pictures of gourmet meals, flower-decked barges, happy tourists 
popping champagne corks and waving from the basket of their balloon at the 
disgruntled old peasants in the fields below. 


‘Looks great, doesn't it?’ said Bunny. 
‘Fabulous.’ 


‘Rome was all right but actually it was kind of a sinkhole when you get right 
down to it. Besides, I like to gad about a little more myself. Stay on the move, 
see a few of the native customs. Just between you and me, I bet Henry's going 
to have a ball with this.' 


I bet he will, too, I thought, staring at a picture of a woman holding up a 
stick of French bread at the camera and grinning like a maniac. 


The twins were studiously avoiding my eye, Camilla bent over Bunny's shirt, 
Charles with his back to me and his elbows on the sideboard, looking out the 
kitchen window. 


‘Of course, this balloon thing's great,’ Bunny said conversationally, ‘but you 
know, I've been wondering, where do you go to the bathroom? Off the side or 
something?’ 


"Look here, I think this is going to take several minutes,’ said Camilla 
abruptly. ‘It's almost nine. Why don't you go ahead with Richard, Charles. Tell 
Julian not to wait.’ 


"Well, it's not going to take you that much longer, is it?' said Bunny crossly, 
craning over to see. ‘What's the big problem? 


Where'd you learn how to iron, anyway?’ 
'I never did. We send our shirts to the laundry.’ 


Charles followed me out the door, a few paces behind. We walked through 
the hall and down the stairs without a word, but once downstairs he stepped 
close behind me and, catching my arm, pulled me into an empty card room. In 
the twenties and thirties, rhere had been a hridge fad at Hampden; when the 
enthusiasm faded, the rooms were never subsequently put to any function and 
no one used them now except for drug deals, or typing, or illicit romantic 
trysts. 


He shut the door. I found myself looking at the ancient card table — inlaid at 
its four corners with a diamond, a heart, a club and a spade. 


"Henry called us,’ said Charles. He was scratching at the raised edge of the 
diamond with his thumb, his head studiously down. 


"When? 

‘Early this morning.’ 

Neither of us said anything for a moment. 

Tm sorry,’ said Charles, glancing up. 

‘Sorry for what?’ 

‘Sorry he told you. Sorry for everything. Camilla’s all upset.’ 


He seemed calm enough, tired but calm, and his intelligent eyes met mine 
with a sad, quiet candor. All of a sudden I felt terribly upset. I was fond of 
Francis and Henry but it was unthinkable that anything should happen to the 
twins. I thought, with a pang, of how kind they had always been; of how 
sweet Camilla was in those first awkward weeks and how Charles had always 
had a way of showing up in my room, or turning to me in a crowd with a 


tranquil assumption — heartwarming to me that he and I were particular 
friends; of walks and car trips and dinners at their house; of their letters — 
frequently unacknowledged on my part — which had come so faithfully over 
the long winter months. 


From somewhere overhead I heard the shriek and groan of water pipes. We 
looked at each other. 


"What are you going to do?' I said. It seemed the only question I had asked of 
anyone for the last twenty-four hours, and yet no one had given me a 
satisfactory answer. 


He shrugged, a funny little one-shouldered shrug, a mannerism he and his 
sister had in common. 'Search me,’ he said wearily. 'I guess we should go.' 


When we got to Julian's office, Henry and Francis were already there. 
Francis hadn't finished his essay. He was scratching rapidly at the second 
page, his fingers blue with ink, while Henry proofread the first one, dashing in 
subscripts and aspirants with his fountain pen. 


He didn't look up. 'Hello,' he said. 'Close the door, would you?’ 
Charles kicked at the door with his foot. 'Bad news,’ he said. 
"Very bad?' 

‘Financially, yes.’ 


Francis swore, in a quick hissing underbreath, without pausing in his work. 
Henry dashed in a few final marks, then fanned the paper in the air to dry it. 


"Well for goodness' sakes,’ he said mildly. 'I hope it can wait. 


I don't want to have to think about it during class. How's that last page 
coming, Francis?’ 


‘Just a minute,’ said Francis, laboriously, his words lagging behind the 
hurried scrawl of his pen. 


Henry stood behind Francis's chair and leaned over his shoulder and began to 
proofread the top of the last page, one elbow resting on the table. 'Camilla's 
with him?' he said. 


"Yes. Ironing his nasty old shirt.’ 


'Hmnn.' He pointed at something with the end of his pen. 


‘Francis, you need the optative here instead of the subjunctive. 


Francis reached up quickly from his work — he was nearly at the end of the 
page — to change it. 


‘And this labial becomes pi, not kappa.’ 


Bunny arrived late, and in a foul temper. ‘Charles,’ he snapped, 'if you want 
this sister of yours to ever get a husband, you better teach her how to use an 
iron.’ I was exhausted and ill prepared and it was all I could do to keep my 
mind on the class. I had ., French at two. but after Greek I went straight hack 
to my room and took a sleeping pill and went to bed. The sleeping pill was an 
extraneous gesture; I didn't need it, but the mere possibility of restlessness, of 
an afternoon full of bad dreams and distant plumbing noises, was too 
unpleasant to even contemplate. 


So I slept soundly, more soundly than I should have, and the day slipped 
easily away. It was almost dark when somewhere, through great depths, I 
became aware that someone was knocking at my door. 


It was Camilla. I must have looked terrible, because she raised an eyebrow 
and laughed at me. 'All you ever do is sleep,’ she said. 'Why is it you're always 
sleeping when I come to see you?’ 


I blinked at her. My shades were down and the hall was dark and to me, half- 
drugged and reeling, she seemed not at all her bright unattainable self but 
rather a hazy and ineffably tender apparition, all slender wrists and shadows 
and disordered hair, the Camilla who resided, dim and lovely, in the gloomy 
boudoir of my dreams. 


‘Come in,' I said. s She did, and closed the door behind her. I sat on the side 
of * the unmade bed, feet bare and collar loose, and thought how wonderful it 
would be if this really were a dream, if I could walk over to where she sat and 
put my hands on either side of her face and kiss her, on the eyelids, on the 
mouth, on the place at her temple where the honey-colored hair graded into 
silky gold. 


We looked at each other for a long time. 
‘Are you sick?’ she said. 


The gleam of her gold bracelet in the dark. I swallowed. It was hard to think 
what to say. 


She stood up again. T'd better go,' she said. 'I'm sorry to have bothered you. I 
came to ask if you wanted to go on a drive. 


"What?' 

'A drive. It's all right, though. Some other time.' 

"Where?' 

‘Somewhere. Nowhere. I'm meeting Francis at Commons in ten minutes.’ 


'No, wait,’ I said. I felt sort of marvelous. A narcotic heaviness still clung 
deliriously to my limbs and I imagined what fun it would be to wander with 
her — drowsy, hypnotized — up to Commons in the fading light, the snow. 


I stood up — it took forever to do it, the floor receding gradually before my 
eyes as if I were simply growing taller and taller by some organic process — 
and walked to my closet. The floor swayed as gently beneath me as the deck 
of an airship. I found my overcoat, then a scarf. Gloves were too complicated 
to bother with. 


‘Okay,’ I said. 'Ready.' 


She raised an eyebrow. 'It's sort of cold out,’ she said. ‘Don't you think you 
should wear some shoes?’ 


We walked to Commons through slush and cold rain, and when we got there 
Charles, Francis, and Henry were waiting for us. 


The configuration struck me as significant, in some way that was not entirely 
clear, everyone except for Bunny — 'What's going on?' I said, blinking at them. 


Nothing,’ said Henry, tracing a pattern on the floor with the sharp, glinting 
ferrule of his umbrella. 'We're just going for a drive. I thought it might be fun’ 
— he paused delicately — 'if we got away from school for a while, maybe had 
some dinner Without Bunny, that is the subtext here, I thought. Where was 
he? The tip of Henry's umbrella glittered. I glanced up and noticed that 
Francis was looking at me with lifted eyebrows. 


"What is it?’ I said irritably, swaying slightly in the doorway. 
He exhaled with a sharp, amused sound. 'Are you drunk?’ he said. 


They were all looking at me in kind of a funny way. 'Yes,' I said. It wasn't 
the truth, but I didn't feel much like explaining. 


The chill sky, misty with fine rain near the treetops, made even the familiar 
landscape around Hampden seem indifferent and remote. The valleys were 
white with fog and the top of Mount Cataract was entirely obscured, invisible 
in the cold haze. Not being able to see it, that omniscient mountain which 


grounded Hampden and its environs in my senses, I found it difficult to get 
my bearings, and it seemed as if we were heading into strange and unmarked 
territory, though I had been down this road a hundred times in all weathers. 
Henry drove, rather fast as he always did, the tires whining on the wet black 
road and water spraying high on either side. 


'I looked at this place about a month ago,' he said, slowing as we approached 
a white farmhouse on a hill, forlorn bales of hay dotting the snowy pasture. 
It's still for sale, but I think they want too much.' 


"How many acres?’ said Camilla. 
‘A hundred and fifty.’ 


"What on earth would you do with that much land?’ She raised her hand to 
clear the hair from her eyes and again I caught the gleam of her bracelet: 
blown hair is sweet, brown hair over the mouth blown... 'You wouldn't want 
to farm it, would you?’ 


'To my way of thinking,’ Henry said, 'the more land the better. 


I'd love to have so much land that from where I lived I couldn't see a 
highway or a telephone pole or anything I didn't want to see. I suppose that's 
impossible, this day and age, and that place is practically on the road. There 
was another farm I saw, over the line in New York State...’ 


A truck shot past in a whine of spray. 


Everyone seemed unusually calm and at ease and I thought I knew why. It 
was because. Bunny wasn't with us. They were avoiding the topic with a 
deliberate unconcern; he must be somewhere now, I thought, doing 
something, what I didn't want to ask. I leaned back and looked at the silvery, 
staggering paths the raindrops made as they blew across my window. 


'If I bought a house anywhere I'd buy one here,’ said Camilla. 
Tve always liked the mountains better than the seashore.’ 


‘So have I,’ said Henry. 'I suppose in that regard my tastes are rather 
Hellenistic. Landlocked places interest me, remote prospects, wild country. 
I've never had the slightest bit of interest in the sea. Rather like what Homer 
says about the Arcadians, you remember? With ships they had nothing to 
do...' 


‘It's because you grew up in the Midwest,’ Charles said. 


‘But if one follows that line of reasoning, then it follows that I would love 
flat lands, and plains. Which I don't. The descriptions of Troy in the Iliad are 
horrible to me — all flat land and burning sun. No. I've always been drawn to 
broken, wild terrain. The oddest tongues come from such places, and the 
strangest mythologies, and the oldest cities, and the most barbarous religions 
Pan himself was born in the mountains, you know. And Zeus. In Parrhasia it 
was that Rheia bore thee,’ he said dreamily, lapsing into Greek, 'where was a 
hill sheltered with the thickest brush It was dark now. Around us, the 
countryside lay veiled and mysterious, silent in the night and fog. This was 
remote, untraveled land, rocky and thickly wooded, with none of the quaint 
appeal of Hampden and its rolling hills, its ski chalets and antique shops, but 
high and perilous and primitive, everything black and desolate even of 
billboards. 


Francis, who knew this territory better than we did, had said there was an inn 
nearby but it was hard to believe there was anything habitable for fifty miles 
around. Then we rounded a bend and our headlights swept across a rusted 
metal sign pockmarked with shotgun pellets, that informed us that the 
Hoosatonic Inn, straight ahead, was the original birthplace of Pie a la Mode. 


The building was ringed by a rickety porch — sagging rockers, peeling paint. 
Inside, the lobby was an intriguing jumble of mahogany and moth-eaten 
velvet, interspersed with deer heads, calendars from filling stations, and a 
large collection of I Bicentennial commemorative trivets, mounted and hung 
upon the wall. * 


The dining room was empty except for a few country people A eating their 
dinners, all of whom looked up at us with innocent, || frank curiosity as we 
came in, at our dark suits and spectacles, at | Francis's monogrammed 
cufflinks and his Charvet tie, at Camilla f» with her boyish haircut and sleek 
little Astrakhan coat. I was a bit surprised at this collective openness of 
demeanor — neither stares nor disapproving looks — until it occurred to me that 
these ^ people probably didn't realize we were from the college. Closer » in, 
we would have been pegged instantly as rich kids from up on *, the hill, kids 
likely to make a lot of noise and leave a bad tip. But J6 here we were only 
strangers, in a place where strangers were rare. 


No one even came by to take an order. Dinner appeared with ,, instantaneous 
magic: pork roast, biscuits, turnips and corn and butternut squash, in thick 
china bowls that had pictures of the presidents (up to Nixon) around their 
rims. 


The waiter, a red-faced boy with bitten nails, lingered for a moment. Finally 
he said, shyly: 'You folks from New York City?’ 


'No,' said Charles, taking the plate of biscuits from Henry. 
‘From here.’ 

"From Hoosatonic?' 

'No. Vermont, I mean.’ 


"Not New York?’ 


'No,' said Francis cheerily, carving at the roast. 'I'm from Boston. 
'I went there,’ said the boy, impressed. 

Francis smiled absently and reached for a dish. 

"You folks must like the Red Sox.’ 


‘Actually I do,’ said Francis. 'Quite a bit. But they never seem to win, do 
they?’ 


‘Some of the time they do. I guess we'll never see 'em win the Series, 
though,’ He was still loitering, trying to think of something else to say, when 
Henry glanced up at him. 


‘Sit down,’ he said unexpectedly. 'Have some dinner, won't you?’ 


After a bit of awkward demurral, he pulled up a chair, though he refused to 
eat anything; the dining room closed at eight, he told us, and it wasn't likely 
that anyone else would come in. 


"We're off the highway, he said. 'Most folks go to bed pretty early around 
here.' His name, we discovered, was John Deacon; he was my age — twenty — 
and had graduated from Equinox High School, over in Hoosatonic proper, 
only two years before. Since graduation, he said, he'd been working on his 
uncle's farm; the waiter's job was a new thing, something to fill the winter 
hours. 


‘This is only my third week,’ he said. 'I like it here, I reckon. 
Food's good. And I get my meals free.’ 


Henry, who generally disliked and was disliked by hoi polloi a category 
which in his view expanded to include persons ranging from teenagers with 
boom boxes to the Dean of Studies of Hamp den, who was independently 
wealthy and had a degree in American Studies from Yale — nonetheless had a 
genuine knack with poor people, simple people, country folk; he was despised 


by the functionaries of Hampden but admiredby its janitors, its gardeners and 
cooks. Though he did not treat them as equals — he didn't treat anyone as an 
equal, exactly — neither did he resort to the condescending friendliness of the 
wealthy. 'I think we're much more hypocritical about illness, and poverty, than 
were people in former ages,’ I remember Julian saying once. 'In America, the 
rich man tries to pretend that the poor man is his equal in every respect but 
money, which is simply not true. Does anyone remember Plato's definition of 
Justice in the Republic? Justice, in a society, is when each level of a hierarchy 
works within its place and is content with it. A poor man who wishes to rise 
above his station is only making himself needlessly miserable. And the wise 
poor have always known this, the same as do the wise rich. 


I'm not entirely sure now that this is true — because if it is, where does that 
leave me? still wiping down windshields in Piano? — but there is no doubt that 
Henry was so confident of his own abilities and position in the world, and so 
comfortable with them, that he had the strange effect of making others 
(including myself) feel comfortable in their respective, lesser positions, 
whatever they might happen to be. Poor people for the most part were 
unimpressed by his manner, except in the most hazy and admiring fashion; 
and as a consequence they were able to see past it to the real Henry, the Henry 
I knew, taciturn, polite, in many respects as simple and straightforward as 
they themselves were. It was a knack he shared with Julian, who was greatly 
admired by the country people who lived around him, much as one likes to 
imagine that kindly Pliny was held in affection by the poor folk of Comum 
and Tifernum. 


Through most of the meal, Henry and the boy talked in the most intimate 
and, to me, baffling terms, about the land around Hampden and Hoosatonic — 
zoning, developments, price per acre, uncleared land and titles and who 
owned what — as the rest of us ate our dinners and listened. It was a 
conversation one might overhear at any rural filling station or feed store; but 
hearing it made me feel curiously happy, and at ease with the world. 


In retrospect, it is odd how little power the dead farmer exercised over an 
imagination as morbid and hysterical as my own. I can well imagine the 
extravagance of nightmares such a thing might provoke (opening the door to a 
dream-classroom, the flannel shirted figure without a face propped ghoulishly 
at a desk, or turning from its work at the blackboard to grin at me), but I 
suppose it is rather telling that I seldom thought of it at all and then only when 
I was reminded in some way. I believe the others were troubled by it as little 
as or less than I was, as evidenced by the fact that they all had carried on so 
normally and in such good humor for so long. Monstrous as it was, the corpse 
itself seemed little more than a prop, something brought out in the dark by 
stagehands and laid at Henry's feet, to be discovered when the lights came up; 
the picture of it, staring and dumb in all its gore, never failed to provoke an 


anxious little frisson but still it seemed relatively harmless compared to the 
very real and persistent menace which I now saw that Bunny presented. 


Bunny, for all his appearance of amiable, callous stability, was actually a 
wildly erratic character. There were any number of reasons for this, but 
primary among them was his complete inability to think about anything 
before he did it. He sailed through the world guided only by the dim lights of 
impulse and habit, confident that his course would throw up no obstacles so 
large that they could not be plowed over with sheer force of momentum. But 
his instincts had failed him in the new set of circumstances presented by the 
murder. Now that the old trusted channel-markers had, so to speak, been 
rearranged in the dark, the automatic-pilot mechanism by which his psyche 
navigated was useless; decks awash, he floundered aimlessly, running on 
sandbars, veering off in all sorts of bizarre directions. 


To the casual observer, I suppose, he seemed pretty much his jolly old self- 
slapping people on the back, eating Twinkies and Ho Hos in the reading room 
of the library and dropping crumbs all down in the bindings of his Greek 
books. But behind that bluff facade some distinct and rather ominous changes 
were taking place, changes of which I was already dimly aware but which 
made themselves more evident as time went on. 


In some respects, it was as if nothing had happened at all. We went to our 
classes, did our Greek, and generally managed to pretend among one another 
and everybody else that things were all right. At the time it heartened me that 
Bunny, in spite of his obviously disturbed state of mind, nonetheless 
continued to follow the old routine so easily. Now, of course, I see that the 
routine was all that held him together. It was his one remaining point of 
reference and he clung to it with a fierce Pavlovian tenacity, partly through 
habit and partly because he had nothing with which to replace it. I suppose the 
others sensed that the continuation of the old rituals was in some respects a 
charade for Bunny's benefit, kept up in order to soothe him, but I did not, nor 
did I have any idea how disturbed he really was until the following event took 
place. 


We were spending the weekend at Francis's house. Aside from the barely 
perceptible strain which manifested itself in all dealings with Bunny at that 
time, things seemed to be going smoothly and he'd been in a good mood at 
dinner that night. When I went to bed he was still downstairs, drinking wine 
left from dinner and playing backgammon with Charles, to all appearances his 
usual self; but some time in the middle of the night I was awakened by a loud, 
incoherent bellowing, from down the corridor in Henry's room. 


I sat up in bed and switched on the light. 


"You don't care about a goddamn thing, do you?' I heard Bunny scream; this 
was followed by a crash, as if of books being swept from desk to floor. 'Not a 
thing but your own fucking self, you and all the rest of them — I'd like to know 
just what Julian would think, you bastard, if I told him a couple of— Don't 
touch me,’ he shrieked, 'get away —I' 


More crashing, as of furniture overturned, and Henry's voice, quick and 
angry. Bunny's rose above it. 'Go ahead!’ he shouted, so loudly I'm sure he 
woke the house. "Try and stop me. I'm not scared of you. You make me sick, 
you fag, you Nazi, you dirty lousy cheapskate Jew-' 


Yet another crash, this time of splintering wood. A door slammed. There 
were rapid footsteps down the hall. Then the muffled noise of sobs — gasping, 
terrible sobs which went on for a long while. 


About three o'clock, when everything was quiet and I was just about to go 
back to sleep, I heard soft footsteps in the hall and, after a pause, a knock at 
my door. It was Henry. 


‘Goodness,’ he said distractedly, looking around my room, at the unmade 
four-poster hed and my clothes scattered on the rug beside it. Tm glad you're 
awake. I saw your light.’ 


‘Jesus, what was all that about?’ 


He ran a hand through his rumpled hair. "What do you suppose?’ he said, 
looking up at me blankly. 'I don't know, really. 


I must have done something to set him off, though for the life of me I don't 
know what. I was reading in my room, and he came in and wanted a 
dictionary. In fact, he asked me to look something up, and — You wouldn't 
happen to have an aspirin, would you?’ 


I sat on the side of my bed and rustled through the drawer of the night table, 
through the tissues and reading glasses and Christian Science leaflets 
belonging to one of Francis's aged female relatives. 'I don't see any,' I said. 
"What happened?’ 


He sighed and sat down heavily in an armchair. There's aspirin in my room, 
he said. 'In a tin in my overcoat pocket. 


Also a blue enamel pillbox. And my cigarettes. Will you go get them for 
me?’ 


He was so pale and shaken I wondered if he was ill. 'What's the matter?’ I 
said. 


'I don't want to go in there. 

"Why not?’ 

"Because Bunny's asleep on my bed.’ 

I looked at him. 'Well, Jesus,’ I said. 'I'm not going to ' 
He waved away my words with a tired hand. 'It's all right. 
Really. I'm just too upset to go myself. He's fast asleep.’ 


I went quietly out of my room and down the hall. Henry's door was at the 
end. Pausing outside with one hand on the knob, I heard distinctly from within 
the peculiar huffing noise of Bunny's snores. 


In spite of what I'd heard earlier, I was unprepared for what I saw: books 
were scattered in a frenzy across the floor; the night table was knocked over; 
against the wall lay the splay-legged remains of a black Malacca chair. The 
shade of the pole lamp was askew and cast a crazy irregular light over the 
room. In the middle of it was Bunny, his face resting on the tweed elbow of 
his jacket and one foot, still in its wing-tipped shoe, dangling off It the edge of 
the bed. Mouth open, his eyes swollen and unfamiliar f without their 
spectacles, he puffed and grumbled in his sleep. I | grabbed up Henry's things 
and left as fast as I could. I Bunny came down late the next morning, puff- 
eyed and sullen, while Francis and the twins and I were eating our breakfasts. 
He ignored our awkward greetings and went straight to the cabinet * and 
made himself a bowl of Sugar Frosted Flakes and sat down I wordlessly at the 
table. In the abrupt silence which had fallen, I i heard Mr Hatch come in the 
front door. Francis excused himself i.1 and hurried away, and I heard the two 
of them murmuring in the hall as Bunny crunched morosely at his cereal. A 
few minutes passed. I was looking, obliquely, at Bunny slumped over his 
bowl « when all of a sudden, in the window behind his head, I saw the distant 
figure of Mr Hatch, walking across the open field beyond the garden, carrying 
the dark, curlicued ruins of the Malacca chair to the rubbish heap. 


As troubling as they were, these eruptions of hysteria were infrequent. But 
they made it plain how upset Bunny was, and how disagreeable he might 
make himself if provoked. It was Henry he was angriest at, Henry who had 
betrayed him, and Henry who was always the subject of these outbursts. Yet 
in a funny way, it was Henry he was best able to tolerate on a daily basis. He 
was more or less constantly irritated with everyone else. He might explode at 
Francis, say, for making some remark he found pretentious, or become 
inexplicably enraged if Charles offered to buy him an ice cream; but he did 
not pick these petty fights with Henry in quite the same trivial, arbitrary way. 
This was in spite of the fact that Henry did not take nearly the pains to placate 


him that everyone else did. When the subject of the barge tour came up — and 
it came up fairly often — Henry played along in only the most perfunctory 
way, and his replies were mechanical and forced. To me, Bunny's confident 
anticipation was more chilling than any outburst; how could he possibly 
delude himself into thinking that the trip would come about, that it would be 
anything but a nightmare if it did? But Bunny, happy as a mental patient, 
would rattle for hours about his delusions of the Riviera, oblivious to a certain 
tightness about Henry's jaw, or to the empty, ominous silences which fell 
when he was talked out and sat, chin in hand, staring dreamily into space. 


It seemed, for the most part, that he sublimated his anger towards Henry into 
his dealings with the rest of the world. He was insulting, rude, quick to start a 
quarrel with virtually everyone he came in contact with. Reports of his 
behavior drifted back to us through various channels. He threw a shoe at some 
hippies playing Hackysack outside his window; he threatened to beat up his 
neighbor for playing the radio too loudly; he called one of the ladies in the 
Bursar's office a troglodyte. It was fortunate for us, I suppose, that his wide 
circle of acquaintance included few people whom he saw on a regular basis. 
Julian saw as much of Bunny as anyone, but their relation did not extend 
much beyond the classroom. More troublesome was his friendship with his 
old schoolmate Cloke Rayburn; and most troublesome of all, Marion. 


Marion, we knew, recognized the difference in Bunny's behavior as clearly 
as we did, and was puzzled and angered by it. If she'd seen the way he was 
around us, she doubtless would have realized that she was not the cause; but 
as it was she saw only the broken dates, the mood swings, the sullenness and 
the quick irrational angers which apparently were directed solely at her — Was 
he seeing another girl? Did he want to break up? An acquaintance at the Early 
Childhood Center told Camilla that one day at work Marion had called Bunny 
six times, and the last time he had hung up on her. 


'God, please God, let her give him the old heave-ho,' said Francis, turning his 
eyes to heaven, when he heard this bit of intelligence. Nothing more was said 
of it, but we watched them carefully and prayed that it would be so. If he had 
his wits about him Bunny surely would keep his mouth shut; but now, with 
his subconscious mind knocked loose from its perch and flapping in the 
hollow corridors of his skull as erratically as a bat, there was no way to be 
sure of anything he might do. 


Cloke he saw rather less frequently. He and Bunny had little in common 
besides their prep school, and Cloke — who ran with a fast crowd, and took a 
lot of drugs besides — was fairly self-preoccupied, not likely to concern 
himself with Bunny's behavior or even to take much notice of it. Cloke lived 
in the house next door to mine, Durbinstall (nicknamed, by campus wags, 
‘Dalmane Hall,’ it was the bustling center of what the administration chose to 


refer to as 'narcotics-related activity’ and one's visits there were occasionally 
punctuated with explosions and small fires, incurred by lone free-basers or the 
student chemists who worked in the basement) and, fortunately for us, he 
lived in the front, on the ground floor. Since his shades were always up and 
there were no trees in the immediate area, it was possible to sit safely on the 
porch of the library, some fifty feet away, and enjoy a luxurious and 
unobscured view of Bunny, framed in a bright window as he gazed open- 
mouthed at comic books or talked, arms waving, with an invisible Cloke. 


'I just like to have an idea,’ Henry explained, 'where he goes. 


But actually it was quite simple to keep tabs on Bunny: I think because he, 
too, was unwilling to let the others, and Henry in particular, out of his sight 
for very long. 


If he treated Henry with deference, it was the rest of us who were forced to 
bear the wearing, day-to-day brunt of his anger. 


Most of the time he was simply irritating: for example, in his ill-informed 
and frequent tirades against the Catholic Church. 


Bunny's family was Episcopalian, and my parents, as far as I knew, had no 
religious affiliation at all; but Henry and Francis and the twins had been reared 
as Catholics; and though none of I them went to church much, Bunny's 
ignorant, tireless stream of blasphemies enraged them. With leers and winks 
he told stories about lapsed nuns, sluttish Catholic girls, pederastic priests (‘So 
then, this Father What's-His-Name, he said to the altar boy — this kid is nine 
years old, mind you, he's in my Cub Scout troop — he says to Tim Mulrooney, 
«Son, would you like to see where me and all the other fathers sleep at 
night?"'). He invented outrageous stories of the perversions of various Popes; 
informed them of little-known points of Catholic doctrine; raved about 
Vatican conspiracies, ignoring Henry's bald refutations and Francis's muttered 
asides about social-climbing Protestants. 


What was worse was when he chose to zero in on one person in particular. 
With some preternatural craftiness he always knew the right nerve to touch, at 
exactly the right moment, to wound and outrage most. Charles was good- 
natured, and slow to anger, but he was sometimes so disturbed by these anti- 
Catholic diatribes that his very teacup would clatter upon its saucer. He was 
also sensitive to remarks about his drinking. As a matter of fact, Charles did 
drinka lot. We all did: but still, though he didn't indulge in any very 
conspicuous excess, I'd frequently had the experience of smelling liquor on 
his breath at odd hours or dropping by unexpectedly in the early afternoon to 
find him with a glass in his hand — which was perhaps understandable, things 
being what they were. Bunny made a show of fraudulent, infuriating concern, 


peppered with snide comments about drunkards and sots. He kept exaggerated 
tallies of Charles's cocktail consumption. He left questionnaires (‘Do you 
sometimes feel you need a drink to get through the day?') and pamphlets 
(freckle-faced child gazing plaintively at parent, asking, ‘Mommy, what's 
«drunk» ?') anonymously in Charles's box, and once went so far as to give his 
name to the campus chapter of Alcoholics Anonymous, whereupon Charles 
was deluged with tracts and phone calls and even a personal visit from a well- 
meaning Twelfth-Stepper. 


With Francis, on the other hand, things were more pointed and unpleasant. 
Nobody said anything about it, ever, but we all knew he was gay. Though he 
was not promiscuous, every so often he would disappear quite mysteriously at 
a party and once, very early in our acquaintance, he'd made a subtle but 
unmistakable pass at me one afternoon when we were drunk and by ourselves 
in the rowboat. I'd dropped an oar, and in the confusion of retrieving it I felt 
his fingertips brush in a casual yet deliberate fashion along my cheek near the 
jawbone. I glanced up, startled, and our eyes met in that way that eyes will, 
and we looked at each other for a moment, the boat wobbling around us and 
the lost oar forgotten. I was dreadfully flustered; embarrassed, I looked away; 
when suddenly, and to my great surprise, he burst out laughing at my distress. 


'No?' he said. 
'No,' I said, relieved. 


It might seem that this episode would have imposed a certain coolness upon 
our friendship. While I don't suppose that anyone who has devoted much 
energy to the study of Classics can be very much disturbed by homosexuality, 
neither am I particularly comfortable with it as it concerns me directly. 
Though I liked Francis well enough, I had always been nervous around him; 
oddly, it was this pass of his that cleared the air between us. I suppose I knew 
it was inevitable, and dreaded it. Once it was out of the way I was perfectly 
comfortable being alone with him even in the most questionable situations — 
drunk, or in his apartment, or even wedged in the back seat of a car. 


With Francis and Bunny it was a different story. They were happy enough to 
be together in company, but if one was around either of them for too long it 
became obvious that they seldom did things with each other and almost never 
spent time alone. I knew why this was; we all did. Still, it never occurred to 
me that they weren't genuinely fond of each other on some level, nor that 
Bunny's gruff jokes concealed, however beguilingly, a keen and very pointed 
streak of malice toward Francis in particular. 


I suppose the shock of recognition is one of the nastiest shocks of all. I'd 
never considered, though I should have, that these crackpot prejudices of 


Bunny's which I found so amusing were not remotely ironic but deadly 
serious. 


Not that Francis, in normal circumstances, wasn't perfectly able to take care 
of himself. He had a quick temper, and a sharp tongue, and though he could've 
put Bunny in his place pretty much any time he chose, he was understandably 
apprehensive about doing so. We were all of us painfully aware of that 
metaphoric vial of nitroglycerine which Bunny carried around with him day 
and night, and which, from time to time, he allowed us a glimpse of, unless 
anyone forget it was always with him, and he had the power to dash it to the 
floor whenever he pleased. 


I don't really have the heart to recount all the vile things he said and did to 
Francis, the practical jokes, the remarks about faggots and queers, the public, 
humiliating stream of questions about his preference and practices: clinical 
and incredibly detailed ones, having to do with such things as enemas, and 
gerbils, and incandescent light bulbs. 


‘Just once,’ I remember Francis hissing, through clenched teeth. 
‘Just once I'd like to...' 
But there was absolutely nothing that anyone could say or do. 


One might expect that I, being at that time perfectly innocent of any crime 
against either Bunny or humanity, would not myself be a target of this 
ongoing sniper fire. Unfortunately I was, perhaps more unfortunately for him 
than for me. How could he have been so blind as not to see how dangerous it 
might be for him to alienate the one impartial party, his one potential ally? 


Because, as fond as I was of the others, I was fond of Bunny, too, and I 
would not have been nearly so quick to cast in my lot with the rest of them 
had he not turned on me so ferociously. Perhaps, in his mind, there was the 
justification of jealousy; his position in the group had started to slip at roughly 
the same time I'd arrived; his resentment was of the most petty and childish 
sort, and doubtless would never have surfaced had he not been in such a 
paranoid state, unable to distinguish his enemies from his friends. 


By stages I grew to abhor him. Ruthless as a gun dog, he picked up with 
rapid and unflagging instinct the traces of everything in the world I was most 
insecure about, all the things I was in most agony to hide. There were certain 
repetitive, sadistic games he would play with me. He liked to entice me into 
lies: 'Gorgeous necktie,’ he'd say, 'that's a Hermes, isn't it?' — and then, when I 
assented, reach quickly across the lunch table and expose my poor tie's 
humble lineage. Or in the middle of a conversation he would suddenly bring 
himself up short and say: ‘Richard, old man, why don't you keep any pictures 


of your folks around?’ 


It was just the sort of detail he would seize upon. His own room was filled 
with an array of flawless family memorabilia, all of them perfect as a series of 
advertisements: Bunny and his brothers, waving lacrosse sticks on a luminous 
black-and-white playing field; family Christmases, a pair of cool, tasteful 
parents in expensive bathrobes, five little yellow-haired boys in identical 
pajamas rolling on the floor with a laughing spaniel, and a ridiculously lavish 
train set, and the tree rising sumptuous in the background; Bunny's mother at 
her debutante ball, young and disdainful in white mink. 


"What?' he'd ask with mock innocence. 'No cameras in California? 


Or can't you have your friends seeing Mom in polyester pants suits? Where'd 
your parents go to school anyway?’ he'd say, interrupting before I could 
interject. 'Are they Ivy League material? Or did they go to some kind of a 
State U?' 


It was the most gratuitous sort of cruelty. My lies about my family were 
adequate, I suppose, but they could not stand up under these glaring attacks. 
Neither of my parents had finished high school; my mother did wear pants 
suits, which she purchased at a factory outlet. In the only photograph I had of 
her, a snapshot, she squinted blurrily at the camera, one hand on the Cyclone 
fence and the other on my father's new riding lawn mower. This, ostensibly, 
was the reason that the photo had been sent me, my mother having some 
notion that I would be interested in the new acquisition; I'd kept it because it 
was the only picture I had of her, kept it tucked inside a Webster's dictionary 
(under M for Mother) on my desk. But one night I rose from my bed, 
suddenly consumed with fear that Bunny would find it while snooping around 
my room. No hiding place seemed safe enough. Finally I burned it in an 
ashtray. 


They were unpleasant enough, these private inquisitions, but I cannot find 
words to adequately express the torments I suffered when he chose to ply this 
art of his in public. Bunny's dead now, requiescat in pace, but so long as I live 
I will never forget a particular interlude of sadism to which he subjected me at 
the twins' apartment. 


A few days earlier, Bunny had been grilling me about where I'd gone to prep 
school. I don't know why I couldn't just have admitted the truth, that I'd gone 
to the public school in Piano. 


Francis had gone to any number of wildly exclusive schools in England and 
Switzerland, and Henry had been at correspondingly exclusive American ones 
before he dropped out entirely in the eleventh grade; but the twins had only 


gone to a little country day school in Roanoke, and even Bunny's own 
hallowed Saint Jerome's was really only an expensive remedial school, the 
sort of place you see advertised in the back of Town and Country as offering 
specialized attention for the academic underachiever. 


My own school was not particularly shameful in this context, yet I evaded 
the question long as I could till finally, cornered and desperate, I had told him 
I'd gone to Renfrew Hall, which is a tennis-y, indifferent sort of boys' school 
near San Francisco. That had seemed to satisfy him, but then, to my immense 
discomfort, and in front of everybody, he brought it up again. 


‘So you were at Renfrew,’ he said chummily, turning to me and popping a 
handful of pistachios in his mouth. 


"Yes. 
"When'd ya graduate?’ 
I offered the date of my real high school graduation. 


'Ah,' he said, chomping busily on his nuts. 'So you were there with Von 
Raumer.' 


"What?' 
"Alec. Alec Von Raumer. From San Fran. Friend of Cloke's. 


He was in the room the other day and we got talking. Lots of old Renfrew 
boys at Hampden, he says,’ I said nothing, hoping he'd leave it at that. 


‘So you know Alec and all.’ 
"Uh, slightly,’ I said. 


‘Funny, he said he didn't remember you,’ said Bunny, reaching over for 
another handful of pistachios without taking his eyes off me. "Not at all.’ 


‘It's a big school.’ 

He cleared his throat. Think so?’ 

"Yes. 

"Von Raumer said it was tiny. Only about two hundred people.’ 


He paused and threw another handful of pistachios into his mouth, and 
chewed as he talked. "What dormitory did you say you were in?’ 


"You wouldn't know it.' 

"Von Raumer told me to make a point of asking you.’ 

"What difference does it make?’ 

‘Oh, it's nothing, nothing at all, old horse,' said Bunny pleasantly. 


‘Just that it's pretty damn peculiar, n'est-ce pas’? You and Alec being there 
together for four years, in a tiny place like Renfrew, and he never laid eyes on 
you even once?’ 


'I was only there for two years." 

"How come you're not in the yearbook?’ 
'I am in the yearbook.’ 

"No you're not.’ 


The twins looked stricken. Henry had his back turned, pre248 tending not to 
listen. Now he said, quite suddenly and without turning around: 'I low do you 
know if lie was in the yearbook or not?’ 


'I don't think I've ever been in a yearbook in my life,' said Francis nervously. 
'I can't stand to have my picture taken. Whenever I try to ' 


Bunny paid no attention. He leaned back in his chair. 


‘Come on,' he said to me. Till give you five dollars if you can tell me the 
name of the dorm you lived in.' 


His eyes were riveted on mine; they were bright with a horrible relish. I said 
something incoherent and then in consternation got up and went into the 
kitchen to get a glass of water. Leaning on the sink, I held the glass to my 
temple; from the living room, Francis whispered something indistinct but 
angry, and then Bunny laughed harshly. I poured the water down the sink and 
turned on the tap so I wouldn't have to listen. 


How was it that a complex, a nervous and delicately calibrated mind like my 
own, was able to adjust itself perfectly after a shock like the murder, while 
Bunny's eminently more sturdy and ordinary one was knocked out of kilter? I 
still think about this sometimes. If what Bunny really wanted was revenge, he 
could have had it easily enough and without putting himself at risk. 


What did he imagine was to be gained from this slow and potentially 
explosive kind of torture, had it, in his mind, some purpose, some goal? Or 


were his own actions as inexplicable to him as they were to us? 


Or perhaps they weren't so inexplicable as that. Because the worst thing 
about all of this, as Camilla once remarked, was not that Bunny had suffered 
some total change of personality, some schizophrenic break, but rather that 
various unpleasant elements of his personality which heretofore we had only 
glimpsed had orchestrated and magnified themselves to a startling level of 
potency. Distasteful as his behavior was, we had seen it all before, only in less 
concentrated and vitriolic form. Even in the happiest times he'd made ran of 
my California accent, my secondhand overcoat and my room barren of 
tasteful bibelots, but in such an ingenuous way I couldn't possibly do anything 
but laugh. (‘'Good Lord, Richard,’ he would say, picking up one of my old 
wingtips and poking his finger through the hole in the bottom. 'What is it with 
you California kids? Richer you are, the more shoddy you look. Won't even 
go to the barber. Before I know it, you'll have hair down to your shoulders and 
be skulking around in rags like Howard Hughes.’) It never occurred to me to 
be offended; this was Bunny, my friend, who had even less pocket money 
than I did and a big rip in the seat of his trousers besides. A good deal of my 
horror at his new behavior sprang from the fact that it was so similar to the old 
and frankly endearing way he used to tease me, and I was as baffled and 
enraged at his sudden departure from the rules as though — if we had been in 
the habit of doing a little friendly sparring — he had boxed me into the corner 
and beaten me half to death. 


To compound this — all these unpleasant recollections to the contrary — so 
much remained of the old Bunny, the one I knew and loved. Sometimes when 
I saw him at a distance — fists in pockets, whistling, bobbing along with his 
springy old walk — I would have a strong pang of affection mixed with regret. 
I forgave him, a hundred times over, and never on the basis of anything more 
than this: a look, a gesture, a certain tilt of his head. It seemed impossible then 
that one could ever be angry at him, no matter what he did. Unfortunately, 
these were often the moments when he chose to attack. He would be amiable, 
charming, chatting in his old distracted manner when, in the same manner and 
without missing a beat, he would lean back in his chair and come out with 
something so horrendous, so backhanded, so unanswerable, that I would vow 
not to forget it, and never to forgive him again. I broke that promise many 
times. I was about to say that it was a promise I finally had to keep, but that's 
not I really true. Even today I cannot muster anything resembling anger for 
Bunny. In fact, I can't think of much I'd like better than for him to step into the 
room right now, glasses fogged and smelling of damp wool, shaking the rain 
from his hair like an old dog and saying: 'Dickie, my boy, what you got for a 
thirsty old man to drink tonight?’ 


One likes to think there's something in it, that old platitude amor vincit 
omnia. But if I've learned one thing in my short sad life, it is that that 


particular platitude is a lie. Love doesn't conquer everything. And whoever 
thinks it does is a fool. 


Camilla he tormented simply because she was a girl. In some ways she was 
his most vulnerable target — through no fault of her own, but simply because 
in Greekdom, generally speaking, women are lesser creatures, better seen than 
heard. This prevailing sentiment among the Argives is so pervasive that it 
lingers in the bones of the language itself; I can think of no better illustration 
of this than the fact that in Greek grammar, one of the very first axioms I 
learned is that men have friends, women have relatives, and animals have 
their own kind. 


Bunny, through no impulse toward Hellenic purity but simply out of mean- 
spiritedness, championed this view. He didn't like women, didn't enjoy their 
company, and even Marion, his self proclaimed raison d'etre, was tolerated as 
grudgingly as a concubine. 


With Camilla he was forced to assume a slightly more paternalistic stance, 
beaming down at her with the condescension of an old papa toward a dimwit 
child. To the rest of us he complained that Camilla was out of her league, and 
a hindrance to serious scholarship. We all found this pretty funny. To be 
honest, none of us, not even the brightest of us, were destined for academic 
achievement in subsequent years, Francis being too lazy, Charles too diffuse, 
and Henry too erratic and generally strange, a sort of Mycroft Holmes of 
classical philology. Camilla was no different, secretly preferring, as I did, the 
easy delights of I English literature to the coolie labor of Greek. What was 
laugh « able was that poor Bunny should display concern about anyone else's 
intellectual capacities. 


Being the only female in what was basically a boys' club must have been 
difficult for her. Miraculously, she didn't compensate by becoming hard or 
quarrelsome. She was still a girl, a slight lovely girl who lay in bed and ate 
chocolates, a girl whose hair smelled like hyacinth and whose scarves 
fluttered jauntily in the breeze. But strange and marvelous as she was, a wisp 
of silk in a forest of black wool, she was not the fragile creature one would 
have her seem. In many ways she was as cool and competent as Henry; tough- 
minded and solitary in her habits, and in many ways as aloof. Out in the 
country it was not uncommon to discover that she had slipped away, alone, 
out to the lake, maybe, or down to the cellar, where once I found her sitting in 
the big marooned sleigh, reading, her fur coat thrown over her knees. 


Things would have been terribly strange and unbalanced without her. She 
was the Queen who finished out the suit of dark Jacks, dark King, and Joker. 


If I found the twins so fascinating, I think it was because there was 


something a tiny bit inexplicable about them, something I was often on the 
verge of grasping but never quite did. Charles, kind and slightly ethereal soul 
that he was, was something of an enigma but Camilla was the real mystery, 
the safe I could never crack. I was never sure what she thought about 
anything, and I knew that Bunny found her even harder to read than I did. In 
good times he'd often offended her clumsily, without meaning to; as soon as 
things turned bad, he tried to insult and belittle her in a variety of ways, most 
of which struck wide of the mark. She was impervious to slights about her 
appearance; met his eye, unblinking, as he told the most vulgar and 
humiliating jokes; laughed if he attempted to insult her taste or her 
intelligence; ignored his frequent discourses, peppered with erudite quotations 
he must have gone to great trouble to dig up, all to the effect that all women 
were categorically inferior to himself: not designed as he was — for 
Philosophy, and Art, and Higher Reasoning, but to attract a husband and to 
Tend the Home. 


Only once did I ever see him get to her. It was over at the twins' apartment, 
very late. Charles, fortunately, was out with Henry getting ice; he'd had a lot 
to drink and if he'd been around things would almost certainly have gotten out 
of hand. 


Bunny was so drunk he could hardly sit up. For most of the evening, he'd 
been in a passable mood, but then, without warning, he turned to Camilla and 
said: 'How come you kids live together?’ 


She shrugged, in that odd, one-shouldered way the twins had. 
"Huh?' 

‘It's convenient,’ said Camilla. 'Cheap.' 

"Well, I think it's pretty damned peculiar. 

T've lived with Charles all my life.’ 


"Not much privacy, is there? Little place like this? On top of each other all 
the time?’ 


‘It's a two-bedroom apartment.' 
‘And when you get lonesome in the middle of the night?’ 
There was a brief silence. 


'I don't know what you're trying to say,' she said icily. 


‘Sure you do,' said Bunny. 'Convenient as hell. Kinda classical, too. Those 
Greeks carried on with their brothers and sisters like nobody's — whoops,’ he 
said, retrieving the whiskey glass which was about to fall off the arm of his 
chair. ‘Sure, it's against the law and stuff,’ he said. 'But what's that to you. 
Break one, you might as well break 'em all, eh?’ 


I was stunned. Francis and I gaped at him as he unconcernedly drained his 
glass and reached for the bottle again. 


To my utter, utter surprise, Camilla said tartly: "You mustn't think I'm 
sleeping with my brother just because I won't sleep with you.’ 


Bunny laughed a low, nasty laugh. 'You couldn't pay me to sleep with you, 
girlie,’ he said. 'Not for all the tea in China. 


She looked at him with absolutely no expression in her pale eyes. Then she 
got up and went into the kitchen, leaving Francis and me to one of the more 
torturous silences I have ever experienced. 


Religious slurs, temper tantrums, insults, coercion, debt: all petty things, 
really, irritants — too minor, it would seem, to move five reasonable people to 
murder. But, if I dare say it, it wasn't until I had helped to kill a man that I 
realized how elusive and complex an act a murder can actually be, and not 
necessarily attributable to one dramatic motive. To ascribe it to such a motive 
would be easy enough. There was one, certainly. But the instinct for self- 
preservation is not so compelling an instinct as one might think. The danger 
which he presented was, after all, not immediate but slow and simmering, a 
sort which can, at least in the abstract, be postponed or diverted in any number 
of ways. I can easily imagine us there, at the appointed time and place, 
anxious suddenly to reconsider, perhaps even to grant a disastrous last minute 
reprieve. Fear for our own lives might have induced us to lead him to the 
gallows and slip the noose around his neck, but a more urgent impetus was 
necessary to make us actually go ahead and kick out the chair. 


Bunny, unawares, had himself supplied us with such an impetus. I would 
like to say I was driven to what I did by some overwhelming, tragic motive. 
But I think I would be lying if I told you that; if I led you to believe that on 
that Sunday afternoon in April, I was actually being driven by anything of the 
sort. 


An interesting question: what was I thinking, as I watched his eyes widen 
with startled incredulity (‘come on, fellas, you're joking, right?') for what 
would be the very last time? Not of the fact that I was helping to save my 
friends, certainly not; nor of fear; nor guilt. But little things. Insults, 
innuendos, petty cruelties. The hundreds of small, unavenged humiliations 


which had been rising in me for months. It was of them The thought, and 
nothing more. 


It was because of them that I was able to watch him at all, without the 
slightest tinge of pity or regret, as he teetered on the cliff's edge for one long 
moment — arms flailing, eyes rolling, a silent-movie comedian slipping on a 
banana peel — before he toppled backwards, and fell to his death. 


Henry, I believed, had a plan. What it was I didn't know. He was always 
disappearing on mysterious errands, and perhaps these were only more of the 
same; but now, anxious to believe that someone, at least, had the situation in 
hand, I imbued them with a certain hopeful significance. Not infrequently he 
refused to answer his door, even late at night when a light was burning and I 
knew he was at home; more than once he appeared late for dinner with wet 
shoes, and windblown hair, and mud on the cuffs of his neat dark trousers. A 
stack of mysterious books, in a Near Eastern language which looked like 
Arabic and bearing the stamp of the Williams College Library, materialized in 
the back seat of his car. This was doubly puzzling, as I did not think he read 
Arabic; nor, to my knowledge, did he have borrowing privileges at the 
Williams College Library. Glancing surreptitiously at the back pocket of one 
of them, I found the card was still in it, and that the last person to check it out 
was an F. 


Lockett, back in 1929. 


Perhaps the oddest thing of all, though, I saw one afternoon when I'd hitched 
a ride into Hampden with Judy Poovey. I wanted to take some clothes to the 
cleaners and Judy, who was going into town, offered to drive me; we'd done 
our errands, not to mention an awful lot of cocaine in the parking lot of 
Burger King, and we were stopped in the Corvette at a red light, listening to 
terrible music (‘Free Bird') on the Manchester radio station, and Judy rattling 
on, like the senseless cokehead she was, about these two guys she knew who'd 
had sex in the Food King (‘Right 2.55 I in the store! In the frozen food aisle!’), 
when she glanced out her « window and laughed. 'Look,' she said. ‘Isn't that 
your friend ' 


Four Eyes over there?’ 


Startled, I leaned forward. There was a tiny head shop directly across the 
street — bongs, tapestries, canisters of Rush, and all sorts of herbs and incense 
behind the counter. I'd never seen anyone in it before except the sad old hippie 
in granny glasses, a Hampden graduate, who owned it. But now to my 
astonishment I saw Henry — black suit, umbrella and all — among the celestial 
maps and unicorns. He was standing at the counter looking at a sheet of paper. 
The hippie started to say something but Henry, cutting him short, pointed to 


something behind the counter. The hippie shrugged and took a little bottle off 
the shelf. I watched them, half-breathless. 


"What do you think he's doing in there, trying to harass that poor old 
Deadhead? That's a shitty store, by the way. I went in there once for a pair of 
scales and they didn't even have any, just a bunch of crystal balls and shit. 
You know that set of green plastic scales I — Hey, you're not listening,’ she 
said when she saw I was still staring out the window. The hippie had leaned 
down and was rummaging under the counter. 'You want me to honk or 
something?’ 


'No,' I shouted, edgy from the cocaine, and pushed her hand away from the 
horn. 


‘Oh, God. Don't scare me like that.’ She pressed her hand to her chest. 'Shit. 
I'm speeding my brains out. That coke was cut with meth or something. Okay, 
okay,’ she said irritably, as the light turned green and the gas truck behind us 
began to honk. 


Stolen Arabic books? A head shop in Hampden town? I couldn't imagine 
what Henry was doing, but as disconnected as his actions seemed, I had a 
childlike faith in him and, as confidently as Dr Watson observing the actions 
of his more illustrious friend, I waited for the design to manifest itself. 


Which it did, in a certain fashion, in a couple of days. 


On a Thursday night, around twelve-thirty, I was in my pajamas and 
attempting to cut my own hair with the aid of a mirror and some nail scissors 
(I never did a very good job; the finished product was always very thistly and 
childish, a la Arthur Rimbaud) when there was a knock at the door. I 
answered it with scissors and mirror in hand. It was Henry. 'Oh, hello,’ I said. 


‘Come in.’ 


Stepping carefully over the tufts of dusty brown hair, he sat down at my 
desk. Inspecting my profile in the mirror, I went back to work with the 
scissors. 'What's up?' I said, reaching over to snip off a long clump by my ear. 


"You studied medicine for a while, didn't you?’ he said. 


I knew this to be a prelude to some health-related inquiry. My one year of 
pre-med had provided scanty knowledge at best, but the others, who knew 
nothing at all of medicine and regarded the discipline per se as less a science 
than a kind of sympathetic magic, constantly solicited my opinion on their 
aches and pains as respectfully as savages consulting a witch doctor. Their 
ignorance ranged from the touching to the downright shocking; Henry, I 


suppose because he'd been ill so often, knew more than the rest of them but 
occasionally even he would startle one with a perfectly serious question about 
humors or spleen. 


‘Are you sick?' I said, one eye on his reflection in the mirror. 
'I need a formula for dosage.' 
"What do you mean, a formula for dosage? Dosage of what?’ 


‘There is one, isn't there? Some mathematical formula which tells the proper 
dose to administer according to height and weight, that sort of thing?’ 


It depends on the drug,’ I said. 'I can't tell you something like that. You'd 
have to look it up in a Physicians' Desk Reference.’ 


'I can't do that.’ 

"They're very simple to use.' 

"That's not what I mean. It's not in the Physicians’ Desk Reference.’ 
"You'd be surprised.' 


For a moment there was no sound except the grinding of my scissors. At last 
he said: "You don't understand. This isn't something doctors generally use.' 


I brought down my scissors and looked at his reflection in the mirror. 
‘Jesus, Henry,’ I said. "What have you got? Some LSD or something?’ 
‘Let's say I do,' he said calmly. 


I put down the mirror and turned to stare at him. ‘Henry, I don't think that's a 
good idea,’ I said. 'I don't know if I ever told you this but I took LSD a couple 
of times. When I was a sophomore in high school. It was the worst mistake I 
ever made in my ' 


'I realize that it's hard to gauge the concentration of such a drug,’ he said 
evenly. 'But say we have a certain amount of empirical evidence. Let's say we 
know, for instance, that x amount of the drug in question is enough to affect a 
seventy pound animal and another, slightly larger amount is sufficient to kill 
it. I've figured out a rough formula, but still we are talking about a very fine 
distinction. So, knowing this much, how do I go about calculating the rest?’ 


I leaned against my dresser and stared at him, my haircut forgotten. ‘Let's see 
what you have,'I said. 


He looked at me intently for a moment or two, then reached into his pocket. 
When his hand opened, I couldn't believe my eyes, but then I stepped closer. 
A pale, slender-stemmed mushroom lay across his open palm. 


‘Amanita caesaria,’ he said. 'Not what you think,’ he added when he saw the 
look on my face. 


'I know what an amanita is.’ 
"Not all amanitae are poisonous. This one is harmless." 


"What is it?’ I said, taking it from his hand and holding it to the light. 'A 
hallucinogen?’ 


"No. Actually they are good to eat — the Romans liked them a great deal — but 
people avoid them as a rale because they are so easily confused with their evil 
twin.’ 


"Evil twin?’ 

‘Amanita phalloides,' said Henry mildly. 'Death cap. 
I didn't say anything for a moment. 

"What are you going to do?'I finally asked. 

"What do you think?’ 


I got up, agitated, and walked to my desk. Henry put the mushroom back in 
his pocket and lit a cigarette. 'Do you have an ashtray?’ he said courteously. 


I gave him an empty soda can. His cigarette was nearly finished before I 
spoke. ‘Henry, I don't think this is a good idea.' 


He raised an eyebrow. 'Why not?’ 


Why not, he asks me. 'Because,' I said, a little wildly, ‘they can trace poison. 
Any kind of poison. Do you think if Bunny keels over dead, people won't find 
it peculiar? Any idiot of a coroner can ' 


'I know that,’ said Henry patiently. "Which is why I'm asking you about the 
dosage.’ 


"That has nothing to do with it. Even a tiny amount can be ' 


— enough to make one extremely ill,’ Henry said, lighting another cigarette. 
‘But not necessarily lethal.’ 


"What do you mean?’ 


I mean,’ he said, pushing his glasses up on the bridge of his nose, 'that 
strictly in terms of virulence there are any number of excellent poisons, most 
of them far superior to this. The woods will be soon full of foxglove and 
monkshood. I could get all the arsenic I needed from flypaper. And even herbs 
that aren't common here — good God, the Borgias would have wept to see the 
health-food store I found in Brattleboro last week. Hellebore, mandrake, pure 
oil of wormwood... I suppose people will buy anything if they think it's 
natural. The wormwood they were selling as organic insect repellent, as if that 
made it safer than the stuff at the supermarket. One bottle could have killed an 
army.’ 

He toyed with his glasses again. 'The problem with these things — excellent 
though they are — is one, as you said, of administration. 


Amatoxins are messy, as poisons go. Vomiting, jaundice, convulsions. 


Not like some of the little Italian comfortives, which are relatively quick and 
kind. But, on the other hand, what could be easier to give? I'm not a botanist, 
you know. Even mycologists have a hard time telling amanitae apart. Some 
handpicked mushrooms ... a few bad ones get mixed in the lot... one friend 
gets dreadfully ill and the other...?' He shrugged. 


We looked at each other. 
"How can you be sure you won't get too much yourself?’ I asked him. 


I suppose I can't be, really,’ he said. 'My own life must be plausibly in 
danger, so you can see I have a delicate margin to work with. But still, 
chances are excellent that I can bring it off. 


All I have to worry about is myself, you know. The rest will take care of 
itself.’ 


I knew what he meant. The plan had several grave flaws, but this was its 
genius: if anything could be relied upon with almost mathematical certainty, it 
was that Bunny, at any given meal, would somehow manage to eat almost 
twice as much as anyone else. 


Henry's face was pale and serene through the haze of his cigarette. He put his 
hand in his pocket and produced the mushroom again. 


"Now, ' he said. 'A single cap, roughly this size, of A. phalloides is enough to 
make a healthy seventy-pound dog quite ill. Vomiting, diarrhea, no 
convulsions that I saw. I don't think there was anything as severe as liver 


dysfunction but I suppose we will have to leave that to the veterinarians. 
Evidently ' 


"Henry, how do you know this?’ 


He was silent for a moment. Then he said: 'Do you know those two horrible 
boxer dogs who belong to the couple who live upstairs?’ 


It was dreadful but 1 had to laugh, 1 couldn't help it. 'No,' i said. "You didn't.’ 


Tm afraid I did,’ he said dryly, mashing out his cigarette. 'One of them is 
fine, unfortunately. The other one won't be dragging garbage up on my front 
porch anymore. It was dead in twenty hours, and only of a slightly larger dose 
— the difference perhaps of a gram. Knowing this, it seems to me that I should 
be able to prescribe how much poison each of us should get. What worries me 
is the variation in concentration of poison from one mushroom to the next. It's 
not as if it's measured out by a pharmacist. Perhaps I'm wrong — I'm sure you 
know more about it than I do — but a mushroom that weighs two grams might 
well have just as much as one that weighs three, no? Hence my dilemma.’ 


He reached into his breast pocket and took out a sheet of paper covered with 
numbers. 'I hate to involve you in this, but no one else knows a thing about 
math and I'm far from reliable myself. Will you have a look?’ 


Vomiting, jaundice, convulsions. Mechanically, I took the sheet of paper 
from him. It was covered with algebraic equations, but at the moment algebra 
was frankly the last thing on my mind. I shook my head and was on the point 
of handing it back when I looked up at him and something stopped me. I was 
in the position, I realized, to put an end to this, now, right here. He really did 
need my help, or else he wouldn't have come to me; emotional appeals, I 
knew, were useless but if I pretended that I knew what I was doing I might be 
able to talk him out of it. 


I took the paper to my desk and sat down with a pencil and forced myself 
through the tangle of numbers step by step. 


Equations about chemical concentration were never my strong point in 
chemistry, and they are difficult enough when you are trying to figure a fixed 
concentration in a suspension of distilled water; but this, dealing as it did with 
varying concentrations in irregularly shaped objects, was virtually impossible. 
He had probably used all the elementary algebra he knew in figuring this, and 
as far as I could follow him he hadn't done a bad job; but this wasn't a 
problem that could be worked with algebra, if it could be worked at all. 
Someone with three or four years of college calculus might have been able to 
come up with something that at least looked more convincing; by tinkering, I 
was able to narrow his ratio slightly but I had forgotten most of the little 


calculus I knew and the answer I wound up with, though probably closer than 
his own, was far from correct. 


I put down my pencil and looked up. The business had taken me about half 
an hour. Henry had got a copy of Dante's Purgatorio from my bookshelf and 
was reading it, absorbed. 


‘Henry.’ 
He glanced up absently. 
"Henry, I don't think this is going to work.' 


He closed the book on his finger. 'I made a mistake in the second part,’ he 
said. 'Where the factoring begins.’ 


It's a good try, but just by looking at it I can tell that it's insolvable without 
chemical tables and a good working knowledge of calculus and chemistry 
proper. There's no way to figure it otherwise. I mean, chemical concentrations 
aren't even measured in terms of grams and milligrams but in something 
called moles.’ 


‘Can you work it for me?’ 


Tm afraid not, though I've done as much as I can. Practically speaking, I 
can't give you an answer. Even a math professor would have a tough time 
with this one. 


'Hmn,' said Henry, looking over my shoulder at the paper on the desk. 'I'm 
heavier than Bun, you know. By twenty-five pounds. That should count for 
something, shouldn't it?’ 


"Yes, but the difference of size isn't large enough to bank on, not with a 
margin of error potentially this wide. Now, if you were fifty pounds heavier, 
maybe 'The poison doesn't take effect for at least twelve hours,’ he said. 'So 
even if I overdose I'll have a certain advantage, a grace period. With an 
antidote on hand for myself, just in case...’ 


‘An antidote?’ I said, jarred, leaning back in my chair. 'Is there such a thing?’ 
‘Atropine. It's in deadly nightshade.’ 


"Well, Jesus, Henry. If you don't finish yourself off with one you will with 
the other.’ 


‘Atropine's quite safe in small amounts.’ 


"They say the same about arsenic but I wouldn't like to try it.' 


"They are exactly opposite in effect. Atropine speeds the nervous system, 
rapid heartbeat and so forth. Amatoxins slow it down.' 


"That still sounds fishy, a poison counteracting a poison.’ 

‘Not at all. The Persians were master poisoners, and they say-' 
I remembered the books in Henry's car. "The Persians?’ I said. 
"Yes. According to the great ' 

'I didn't know you read Arabic.’ 


T don't, at least not well, but they're the great authorities on the subject and 
most of the books I need haven't been translated. 


I've been going through them as best I can with a dictionary. 


I thought about the books I had seen, dusty, bindings crumbled with age. 
"When were these things written?’ 


‘Around the middle of the fifteenth century, I should say. 

I put down my pencil. 'Henry.' 

"What?' 

"You should know better than that. You can't rely on something that old.' 


"The Persians were master poisoners. These are practical handbooks, how-tos 
if you will. I don't know of anything quite like them.’ 


‘Poisoning people is quite a different matter from curing them.' 


"People have used these books for centuries. Their accuracy is beyond 
dispute.’ 


"Well, I have as much respect for ancient learning as you do, — but I don't 
know that I'd want to stake my life on some home remedy from the Middle 
Ages.’ 


"Well, I suppose I can check it somewhere else,’ he said, without much 
conviction. 


‘Really. This is too serious a matter to ' 


"Thank you,' he said smoothly. 'You've been a great help.' He picked up my 
copy of Purgatorio again. 'This isn't a very good translation, you know,’ he 
said, leafing through it idly. ‘Singleton is the best if you don't read Italian, 
quite literal, but you lose all the terza rima, of course. For that you should read 
the original. 


In very great poetry the music often comes through even when one doesn't 
know the language. I loved Dante passionately before I knew a word of 
Italian.’ 


‘Henry,’ I said, in a low, urgent voice. 


He glanced over at me, annoyed. 'Anything I do will be dangerous, you 
know,' he said. 


‘But nothing is any good if you die.’ 


'The more I hear about luxury barges, the less terrible death begins to seem,’ 
he said. 'You've been quite a help. Good night.’ 


Early the next afternoon, Charles dropped by for a visit. 'Gosh, it's hot in 
here,' he said, shouldering off his wet coat and throwing it over the back of a 
chair. His hair was damp, his face flushed and radiant. A drop of water 
trembled at the end of his long, fine nose. He sniffed and wiped it away. 'Don't 
go outside, whatever you do,' he said. ‘It's terrible out. By the way, you 
haven't seen Francis, have you?’ 


I ran a hand through my hair. It was a Friday afternoon, no class, and I hadn't 
been out of my room all day, nor had I slept much the night before. 'Henry 
stopped by last night,’ I said. 


"Really? What did he have to say? Oh, I almost forgot.’ He reached in the 
pocket of his overcoat and pulled out a bundle wrapped in napkins. 'I brought 
you a sandwich since you weren't at lunch. Camilla said the lady in the dining 
hall saw me stealing it and she made a black mark by my name on a list.’ 


It was cream cheese and marmalade, I knew without looking. 
The twins were fanatical about them but I didn't like them much. 


I unwrapped a corner of it and took a bite, then set it down on my desk. 
"Have you talked to Henry recently?’ I said. 


‘Just this morning. He drove me to the bank.’ 


I picked up the sandwich and took another bite. I hadn't swept, and my hair 


still lay in clumps on the floor. 'Did he,’ I said, 'say anything about ' 
"About what?’ 
‘About asking Bunny to dinner in a couple of weeks?’ 


‘Oh, that,' said Charles, lying back on my bed and propping his head up with 
pillows. 'I thought you knew about that already. 


He's been thinking about that for a while.’ 
"What do you think?’ 


'I think he's going to have a hell of a hard time finding enough mushrooms to 
even make him sick. It's just too early. Last week he made Francis and me go 
out and help him, but we hardly found a thing. Francis came back really 
excited, saying, «Oh, my God, look, I found all these mushrooms,» but then 
we looked in his bag and it was just a bunch of puffballs.’ 


‘So you think he'll be able to find enough?’ 
‘Sure, if he waits awhile. I know you don't have a cigarette, do you?’ 
'No.' 


'I wish you smoked. I don't know why you don't. You weren't an athlete in 
high school or anything, were you?’ 


'No.' 


‘That's why Bun doesn't smoke. Some clean-living type of football coach got 
to him at an impressionable age.’ 


"Have you seen Bun lately?’ 


"Not too much. He was at the apartment last night, though, and stayed 
forever.’ 


"This isn't just hot air?’ I said, looking at him closely. 'You're really going to 
go through with it?’ 


Td rather go to jail than know that Bunny was going to be hanging around 
my neck for the rest of my life. And I'm not too keen on going to jail, either, 
now that I think about it. You know,' he said, sitting up on my bed and 
bending over double, as if from a pain in his stomach, 'I really wish you had 
some cigarettes. 


Who's that awful girl who lives down the hall from you —Judy?' 
‘Poovey,’ I said. 


'Go knock on her door, why don't you, and ask her if she'll give you a pack. 
She looks like the sort who keeps cartons in her room.’ 


It was getting warmer. The dirty snow was pockmarked from the warm rain, 
and melting in patches to expose the slimy, yellowed grass beneath it; icicles 
cracked and plunged like daggers from the sharp peaks of the roofs. 


"We might be in South America now,' Camilla said one night while we were 
drinking bourbon from teacups in my room and listening to rain dripping from 
the eaves. "That's funny, isn't it?’ 


"Yes,' I said, though I hadn't been invited. 


'I didn't like the idea then. Now I think we might've got by all right down 
there.’ 


'I don't see how.’ 


She leaned her cheek on her closed fist. 'Oh, it wouldn't have been so bad. 
We could have slept in hammocks. Learned Spanish. 


Lived in a little house with chickens in the yard.' 
‘Got sick,' I said. "Been shot.’ 


'I can think of worse things,’ she said, with a brief sideways glance that 
pierced me to the heart. 


The windowpanes rattled in a sudden gust. 
Well,’ I said, 'I'm glad you didn't go." 


She ignored this remark and, looking out the dark window, took another sip 
from the teacup. 


It was by now the first week of April, not a pleasant time for me or anyone. 
Bunny, who had been relatively calm, was now on a rampage because Henry 
refused to drive him down to Washington, D. C., to see an exhibit of World 
War I biplanes at the Smithsonian. The twins were getting calls twice daily 
from an ominous B. Perry at their bank, and Henry from a D. Wade at his; 
Francis's mother had discovered his attempt to withdraw money from the trust 
fund, and each day brought a fresh volley of communication from her. 'Good 
God,' he muttered, having torn open the latest arrival and scanned it with 


disgust. 


"What does she say?’ 


m 


' «Baby. Chris and 1 are so concerned about you,"' Francis read in a deadpan 
voice. ' «Now I do not pretend to be an authority on Young People and maybe 
you are going through something I am too old to understand but I have always 
hoped you would be able to go to Chris with your problems." 


‘Chris has a lot more problems than you do, it seems to me,' 


I said. The character that Chris played on The Young Doctors' was sleeping 
with his brother's wife and involved in a baby smuggling ring. 


Tl say Chris has problems. He's twenty-six years old and married to my 
mother, isn't he? «Now I even hate to bring this up," he read, ' «and I wouldn't 
have suggested it had not Chris insisted but you know, dear, how he loves you 
and he says he has seen this type of thing so often before in show business 
you know. So I phoned the Betty Ford Center and precious, what do you 
think? They have a nice little room waiting just for you, dear» — no, let me 
finish,’ he said, when I started to laugh.’ «Now I know you'll hate the idea but 
really you needn't be ashamed, it's a Disease, baby, that's what they told me 
when I went and it made me feel so much better you cannot imagine. Of 
course I don't know what it is you're taking but really, darling, let's be 
practical, whatever it is it must be frightfully expensive mustn't it and I have 
to be quite honest with you and tell you that we simply cannot afford it, not 
with your grandpa the way he is and the taxes on the house and 
everything...'» 


"You ought to go,' I said. 


‘Are you kidding? It's in Palm Springs or someplace like that and besides I 
think they lock you up and make you do aerobics. 


She watches too much television, my mother,’ he said, glancing at the letter 
again. 


The telephone began to ring. 

‘Goddammit,' he said in a tired voice. 

‘Don't answer it.’ 

Tf I don't she'll call the police,’ he said, and picked up the receiver. 


I let myself out (Francis pacing back and forth: 'Funny? What do you mean, I 


sound funny'?') and walked to the post office, where in my box I found, to my 
surprise, an elegant little note from Julian asking me to lunch the next day. 


Julian, on special occasions, sometimes had lunches for the class; he was an 
excellent cook and, when he was a young man living off his trust fund in 
Europe, had the reputation of being an excellent host as well. This was, in 
fact, the basis of his acquaintance with most of the famous people in his life. 
Osbert Sitwell, in his diary, mentions Julian Morrow's ‘sublime little fetes,’ 
and there are similar references in the letters of people ranging from Charles 
Laughton to the Duchess of Windsor to Gertrude Stein; Cyril Connolly, who 
was notorious for being a hard guest to please, told Harold Acton that Julian 
was the most gracious American that he had ever met — a doubleedged 
compliment, admittedly — and Sara Murphy, no mean hostess herself, once 
wrote him pleading for his recipe for sole veronique. But though I knew that 
Julian frequently invited Henry for lunches a deux, I had never before 
received an invitation to dine alone with him, and I was both flattered and 
vaguely worried. At that time, anything even slightly out of the ordinary 
seemed ominous to me, and, pleased as I was, I could not but feel that he 
might have an objective other than the pleasure of my company. I took the 
invitation home and studied it. The airy, oblique style in which it was written 
did little to dispel my feeling that there was more in it than met the eye. I 
phoned the switchboard and left a message for him to expect me at one the 
next day. 


‘Julian doesn't know anything about what happened, does he?' I asked Henry 
when next I saw him alone. 


"What? Oh, yes,' said Henry, glancing up from his book. 'Of course.’ 
'He knows you killed that guy?’ 


‘Really, you needn't be so loud,’ said Henry sharply, turning in his chair. 
Then, in a quieter voice: 'He knew what we were trying to do. And approved. 
The day after it happened, we drove out to his house in the country. Told him 
what happened. He was delighted.' 


"You told him everything?’ 


"Well, I saw no point in worrying him, if that's what you mean,’ said Henry, 
adjusting his glasses and going back to his book. 


Julian, of course, had made the lunch himself, and we ate at the big round 
table in his office. After weeks of bad nerves, bad conversation, and bad food 
in the dining hall, the prospect of a meal with him was immensely cheering; 
he was a charming companion and his dinners, though deceptively simple, 
had a sort of Augustan wholesomeness and luxuriance which never failed to 


soothe. 


There was roasted lamb, new potatoes, peas with leeks and fennel; a rich and 
almost maddeningly delicious bottle of Chateau Latour. I was eating with 
better appetite than I had had in ages when I noticed that a fourth course had 
appeared, with unobtrusive magic, at my elbow: mushrooms. They were pale 
and slender-stemmed, of a type I had seen before, steaming in a red wine 
sauce that smelled of coriander and rue. 


"Where did you get these?'l said. Hfj 'Ah. You're quite observant,’ he said, 
pleased. 'Aren t they marvelous? Quite rare. Henry brought them to me.' 


I took a quick swallow of my wine to hide my consternation. 
"He tells me — may I?' he said, nodding at the bowl. 


I passed it to him, and he spooned some of them onto his plate. "Thank you, 
he said. 'What was I saying? Oh, yes. Henry tells me that this particular sort of 
mushroom was a great favorite of the emperor Claudius. Interesting, because 
you remember how Claudius died.' 


I did remember. Agrippina had slipped a poisoned one into his dish one 
night. 


‘They're quite good,' said Julian, taking a bite. 'Have you gone with Henry on 
any of his collecting expeditions?’ 


"Not yet. He hasn't asked me to.' 


IT must say, I never thought I cared very much for mushrooms, but 
everything he's brought me has been heavenly.’ 


Suddenly I understood. This was a clever piece of groundwork on Henry's 
part. 'He's brought them to you before?’ I said. 


"Yes. Of course I wouldn't trust just anyone with this sort of thing, but Henry 
seems to know an amazing lot about it.' 


'I believe he probably does,’ I said, thinking of the boxer dogs. 


‘It's remarkable how good he is at anything he tries. He can grow flowers, 
repair clocks like a jeweler, add tremendous sums in his head. Even if it's 
something as simple as bandaging a cut finger he manages to do a better job 
of it.' He poured himself another glass of wine. 'I gather that his parents are 
disappointed that he's decided to concentrate so exclusively on the classics. I 
disagree, of course, but in a certain sense it is rather a pity. He would have 


made a great doctor, or soldier, or scientist.’ 
I laughed. 'Or a great spy,' I said. 


Julian laughed too. 'All you boys would be excellent spies,’ he said. 'Slipping 
about in casinos, eavesdropping on heads of state. 


Really, won't you try some of these mushrooms? They're glorious.’ 
I drank the rest of my wine. 'Why not,' I said, and reached for the bowl. 


After lunch, when the dishes had been cleared away and we were talking 
about nothing in particular, Julian asked, out of the blue, if I'd noticed 
anything peculiar about Bunny recently. 


"Well, no, not really,’ I said, and took a careful sip of tea. 


He raised an eyebrow. 'No? I think he's behaving very strangely. Henry and I 
were talking only yesterday about how brusque and contrary he's become.’ 


«I think he's been in kind of a bad mood.’ 


He shook his head. 'I don't know. Edmund is such a simple soul .1 never 
thought I'd be surprised at anything he did or said, but he and I had a very odd 
conversation the other day.’ 


'Odd?' I said cautiously. 


‘Perhaps he'd only read something that disturbed him. I don't know. I am 
worried about him.' 


‘Why?’ 


‘Frankly, I'm afraid he might be on the verge of some disastrous religious 
conversion.’ 


I was jarred. 'Really?' I said. 


Tve seen it happen before. And I can think of no other reason for this sudden 
interest in ethics. Not that Edmund is profligate, but really, he's one of the 
least morally concerned boys I've ever known. I was very startled when he 
began to question me — in all earnestness — about such hazy concerns as Sin 
and Forgiveness. 


He's thinking of going into the Church, I just know it. Perhaps that girl has 
something to do with it, do you suppose?’ 


He meant Marion. He had a habit of attributing all of Bunny's faults 
indirectly to her — his laziness, his bad humors, his lapses of taste. 'Maybe,' I 
said. 


Is she a Catholic?’ 


'I think she's Presbyterian,’ I said. Julian had a polite but implacable 
contempt for Judeo-Christian tradition in virtually all its forms. He would 
deny this if confronted, citing evasively his affection for Dante and Giotto, but 
anything overtly religious filled him with a pagan alarm; and I believe that 
like Pliny, whom he resembled in so many respects, he secretly thought it to 
be a degenerate cult carried to extravagant lengths. 


'A Presbyterian? Really?’ he said, dismayed. 
'I believe so.' 


"Well, whatever one thinks of the Roman Church, it is a worthy and powerful 
foe. I could accept that sort of conversion with grace. But I shall be very 
disappointed indeed if we lose him to the Presbyterians.' 


In the first week of April the weather turned suddenly, unseasonably, 
insistently lovely. The sky was blue, the air warm and windless, and the sun 
beamed on the muddy ground with all the sweet impatience of June. Toward 
the fringe of the wood, the young trees were yellow with the first tinge of new 
leaves; woodpeckers laughed and drummed in the copses and, lying in bed 
with my window open, I could hear the rush and gurgle of the melted snow 
running in the gutters all night long. 


In the second week of April everyone waited anxiously to see if the weather 
would hold. It did, with serene assurance. Hyacinth and daffodil bloomed in 
the flower beds, violet and periwinkle in the meadows; damp, bedraggled 
white butterflies fluttered drunkenly in the hedgerows. I put away my winter 
coat and overshoes and walked around, nearly light-headed with joy, in my 
shirtsleeves. 


"This won't last,’ said Henry. 


In the third week of April, when the lawns were green as Heaven and the 
apple blossoms had recklessly blown, I was reading in my room on a Friday 
night, with the windows open and a cool, damp wind stirring the papers on my 
desk. There was a party across the lawn, and laughter and music floated 
through the night air. It was long after midnight. I was nodding, half-asleep 
over my book, when someone bellowed my name outside my window. 


I shook myself and sat up, just in time to see one of Bunny's shoes flying 


through my open window. It hit the floor with a thud. I jumped up and leaned 
over the sill. Far below, I saw his staggering, shaggy-headed figure, 
attempting to steady itself by clutching at the trunk of a small tree. 


"What the hell's wrong with you?’ 


He didn't reply, only raised his free hand in a gesture half wave, half salute, 
and reeled out of the light. The back door slammed, and a few moments later 
he was banging on the door of my room. 


When I opened it he came limping in, one shoe off and one shoe on, leaving 
a muddy trail of macabre, unmatched footprints behind him. His spectacles 
were askew and he stank of whiskey. 


‘Dickie boy,' he mumbled. 


The outburst beneath my window seemed to have exhausted him and left 
him strangely uncommunicative. He tugged off his muddy sock and tossed it 
clumsily away from him. It landed on my bed. 


By degrees, I managed to extricate from him the evening's events. The twins 
had taken him to dinner, afterwards to a bar in town for more drinks; he'd then 
gone alone to the party across the lawn, where a Dutchman had tried to make 
him smoke pot and a freshman girl had given him tequila from a thermos. 


(‘Pretty little gal. Sort of a Deadhead, though. She was wearing clogs, you 
know those things? And a tie-dyed T-shirt. I can't stand them. «Honey,» I 
said, «you're such a cutie, how come you want to get yourself up in that nasty 
stuff?"') Then, abruptly, he broke off this narrative and lurched away — leaving 
the door of my room open behind him — and I heard the sound of noisy, 
athletic vomiting. 


He was gone a long time. When he returned he smelled sour, and his face 
was damp and very pale; but he seemed composed. , 'Whew.' he said, 
collapsing in my chair and mopping his forehead with a red bandanna. 'Musta 
been something I ate,’ j| ‘Did you make it to the bathroom?’ I asked 
uncertainly. The I vomiting had sounded ominously near my own door. | 
"Naw, ' he said, breathing heavily. 'Ran in the broom closet. I Get me a glass of 
water, wouldja.' 


In the hall, the door to the service closet hung partly open, J providing a coy 
glimpse of the reeking horror within. I hurried past it to the kitchen. 


Bunny looked at me glassily when I came back in. His expression had 
changed entirely, and something about it made me. J. uneasy. I gave him the 
water and he took a large, greedy gulp. '— 'Not too quick,’ I said, alarmed. 


He paid no attention and drank the rest in a swallow, then set the glass on the 
desk with a trembling hand. Beads of sweat stood out on his forehead. 


‘Oh, my God,’ he said. 'Sweet Jesus.’ 


Uneasily, 1 crossed to my bed and sat down, trying to think of some neutral 
subject, but before I could say anything he spoke again. 


‘Can't stomach it any longer,’ he mumbled. 'Just can't. Sweet Italian Jesus.’ 
I didn't say anything. 


Shakily, he passed a hand over his forehead. "You don't even know what the 
devil I'm talking about, do you?’ he said, with an oddly nasty tone in his voice. 


Agitated, I recrossed my legs. I'd seen this coming, seen it coming for 
months and dreaded it. I had an impulse to rush from the room, just leave him 
sitting there, but then he buried his face in his hands. 


"All true,’ he mumbled. 'All true. Swear to God. Nobody knows but me.’ 


Absurdly, I found myself hoping it was a false alarm. Maybe he and Marion 
had broken up. Maybe his father had died of a heart attack. I sat there, 
paralyzed. 


He dragged his palms down over his face, as if he were wiping water from it, 
and looked up at me. ‘You don't have a clue,’ he said. His eyes were 
bloodshot, uncomfortably bright. 'Boy. You don't have a fucking clue." 


I stood up, unable to bear it any longer, and looked around my room 
distractedly. 'Uh,' I said, 'do you want an aspirin? I meant to ask you earlier. If 
you take a couple now you won't feel so bad in the ' 


"You think I'm crazy, don't you?' Bunny said abruptly. 


Somehow I'd always known it was going to happen this way, the two of us 
alone, Bunny drunk, late at night... ‘Why no,' I said. 'All you need is a little ' 


"You think I'm a lunatic. Bats in the belfry. Nobody listens to me,’ he said, 
his voice rising. 


I was alarmed. 'Calm down,’ I said. 'I'm listening to you. 
"Well, listen to this,’ he said. 


It was three in the morning when he stopped talking. The story he told was 
drunken and garbled, out of sequence and full of vituperative, self-righteous 


digressions; but I had no problem understanding it. It was a story I'd already 
heard. For a while we sat there, mute. My desk light was shining in my eyes. 
The party across the way was still going strong and a faint but boisterous rap 
song throbbed obtrusively in the distance. 


Bunny's breathing had become loud and asthmatic. His head fell on his chest, 
and he woke with a start. 'What?' he said, confused, as if someone had come 
up behind him and shouted in his ear. 'Oh. Yes." 


I didn't say anything. 
"What do you think about that, eh?’ 


I was unable to answer. I'd hoped, faintly, that he might have blacked it all 
out. 


‘Damndest thing. Fact truer than fiction, boy. Wait, that's not right. How's it 
go?’ 


‘Fact stranger than fiction,’ I said mechanically. It was fortunate, I suppose, 
that I didn't have to make an effort to look shaken up or stunned. I was so 
upset I was nearly sick. 


‘Just goes to show,' said Bunny drunkenly. 'Could be the guy next door. 
Could be anybody. Never can tell.' 


I put my face in my hands. 


"Tell anybody you want,’ Bunny said. "Tell the goddamn mayor. I don't care. 
Lock ‘em right up in that combination post office and jail they got down by the 
courthouse. Thinks he's so smart,’ he muttered. 'Well, if this wasn't Vermont 
he wouldn't be sleeping so well at night, let me tell you. Why, my dad's best 
friends with the police commissioner in Hartford. He ever finds out about this 
— geez. He and Dad were at school together. Used to date his daughter in the 
tenth grade...» His head was drooping and he shook himself again. ‘Jesus,’ he 
said, nearly falling out of his chair. 


I stared at him. 
‘Give me that shoe, would you?’ 


I handed it to him, and his sock too. He looked at them for a moment, then 
stuffed them in the outside pocket of his blazer. 


‘Don't let the bedbugs bite,’ he said, and then he was gone, leaving the door 
of my room open behind him. I could hear his peculiar limping progress all 


the way down the stairs. 


The objects in the room seemed to swell and recede with each thump of my 
heart. In a horrible daze, I sat on my bed, one elbow on the windowsill, and 
tried to pull myself together. 


Diabolical rap music floated from the opposite building, where a couple of 
shadowy figures were crouched on the roof, throwing empty beer cans at a 
disconsolate band of hippies huddled around a bonfire in a trash can, trying to 
smoke a joint. A beer can sailed from the roof, then another, which hit one of 
them on the head with a tinny sound. Laughter, aggrieved cries. 


I was gazing at the sparks flying from the garbage can when suddenly I was 
struck by a harrowing thought. Why had Bunny decided to come to my room 
instead of Cloke's, or Marion's? As I looked out the window the answer was 
so obvious it gave me a chill. It was because my room was by far the closest. 
Marion lived in Roxburgh, on the other end of campus, and Cloke's was on 
the far side of Durbinstall. Neither place was readily apparent to a drunk 
stumbling out into the night. But Monmouth was scarcely thirty feet away, 
and my own room, with its conspicuously lighted window, must have loomed 
in his path like a beacon. 


I suppose it would be interesting to say that at this point I felt torn in some 
way, grappled with the moral implications of each of the courses available to 
me. But 1 don't recall experiencing anything of the sort. I put on a pair of 
loafers and went downstairs to call Henry. 


The pay phone in Monmouth was on a wall by the back door, too exposed 
for my taste, so I walked over to the Science Building, my shoes squelching 
on the dewy grass, and found a particularly isolated booth on the third floor 
near the chemistry labs. 


The phone must've rung a hundred times. No answer. Finally, in 
exasperation, I pressed down the receiver and dialed the twins. 


Eight rings, nine; then, to my relief, Charles's sleepy hello. 

"Hi, it's me,’ I said quickly. ‘Something happened.’ 

"What? he said, suddenly alert. I could hear him sitting up in bed. 
"He told me. Just now.’ 

There was a long silence. 


'Hello?' I said. 


‘Call Henry,’ said Charles abruptly. 'Hang up the phone and call him right 


now. 
'I already did. He's not answering the phone.’ 


Charles swore under his breath. 'Let me think,’ he said. 'Oh, hell. Can you 
come over?’ 


‘Sure. Now?' 

T'll run down to Henry's and see if I can get him to the door. 
We should be back by the time you get here. Okay?’ 

‘Okay,' I said, but he'd already hung up. 


When I got there, about twenty minutes later, I met Charles coming from the 
direction of Henry's, alone. 


'No luck?’ 


'No,' he said, breathing hard. His hair was rumpled and he had a raincoat on 
over his pajamas. 


"What'll we do?' 
'I don't know. Come upstairs. We'll think of something.’ 


We had just got our coats off when the light in Camilla's room came on and 
she appeared in the doorway, blinking, cheeks aflame. 'Charles? What are you 
doing here?' she said when she saw me. 


Rather incoherently, Charles explained what had happened. 


With a drowsy forearm she shielded her eyes from the light and listened. She 
was wearing a man's nightshirt, much too big for her, and I found myself 
staring at her bare legs — tawny calves, slender ankles, lovely, dusty-soled 
boy-feet. 


'Is he there?’ she said. 
'I know he is.’ 
"You sure?’ 


"Where else would he be at three in the morning?’ 


"Wait a second,’ she said, and went to the telephone. 'I just want to try 
something.’ She dialed, listened for a moment, hung up, dialed again. 


"What are you doing?’ 


It's a code,’ she said, the receiver cradled between shoulder and ear. 'Ring 
twice, hang up, ring again. 


‘Code?’ 
"Yes. He told me once — Oh, hello, Henry,’ she said suddenly, and sat down. 
Charles looked at me. 


"Well, I'll be damned,’ he said quietly. 'He must have been awake the whole 
time.’ 


"Yes,' Camilla was saying; she stared at the floor, bobbing the foot of her 
crossed leg idly up and down. "That's fine. I'll tell him." 


She hung up. 'He says to come over, Richard,’ she said. "You should leave 
now. He's waiting for you. Why are you looking at me like that?’ she said 
crossly to Charles. 


‘Code, eh?’ 

"What about it?’ 

"You never told me about it.’ 

‘It's stupid. I never thought to.’ 

"What do you and Henry need a secret code for?’ 
‘It's not a secret.’ 

"Then why didn't you tell me?’ 

‘Charles, don't be such a baby.’ 


Henry — wide awake, no explanations — met me at the door in his bathrobe. I 
followed him into the kitchen, and he poured me a cup of coffee and sat me 
down. 'Now,' he said, 'tell me what happened.’ 


I did. He sat across the table, smoking cigarette after cigarette with his dark 
blue eyes fastened on mine. He interrupted with questions only once or twice. 
Certain parts he asked me to repeat. 


I was so tired that I rambled a bit, but he was patient with my digressions. 


By the time I finished, the sun was up and the birds were singing. Spots were 
swimming in front of my eyes. A damp, cool breeze shifted in the curtains. 
Henry switched off the lamp and went to the stove and began, rather 
mechanically, to make some bacon and eggs. I watched him move around the 
dim, dawn-lit kitchen in his bare feet. 


While we ate, I looked at him curiously. He was pale, and his eyes were tired 
and preoccupied, but there was nothing in his expression that gave me any 
indication what he might be thinking. 


‘Henry,’ I said. 


He started. It was the first time either of us had said a word for half an hour 
or more. 


"What are you thinking about?’ 

"Nothing. 

'If you've still got the idea of poisoning him ' 

He glanced up with a quick flash of anger that surprised me. 


‘Don't be absurd,’ he snapped. 'I wish you'd shut up a minute and let me 
think.’ 


I stared at him. Abruptly he stood up and went to pour himself some more 
coffee. For a moment he stood with his back to me, hands braced on the 
counter. Then he turned around. 


Tm sorry,’ he said wearily. 'It's just not very pleasant to look back on 
something that one has put so much effort and thought into, only to realize it's 
completely ridiculous. Poisoned mushrooms. 


The whole idea is like something from Sir Walter Scott.’ 
I was taken aback. 'But I thought it was kind of a good idea,' 
I said. 


He rubbed his eyes with his thumb and forefinger. 'Too good,’ he said. 'I 
suppose that when anyone accustomed to working with the mind is faced with 
a straightforward action, there's a tendency to embellish, to make it overly 
clever. On paper there's a certain symmetry. Now that I'm faced with the 
prospect of executing it I realize how hideously complicated it is. 


"What's wrong?’ 
He adjusted his glasses. "The poison is too slow.’ 
'I thought that's what you wanted.’ 


‘There are half a dozen problems with it. Some of them you pointed out. 
Control of the dose is risky, but time, I think, is the real concern. From my 
standpoint the longer the better, but still ... A person can do an awful lot of 
talking in twelve hours.' He was quiet for a moment. 'It's not as if I haven't 
seen this all along. 


The idea of killing him is so repellent that I haven't been able to think of it as 
anything but a chess-problem. A game. You have no idea how much thought 
I've put into this. Even to the strain of poison. It's said to make the throat 
swell, do you know that? Victims are said to be struck dumb, unable to name 
their poisoner.' He sighed. "Too easy to beguile myself with the Medicis, the 
Borgias, all those poisoned rings and roses... It's possible to do that, did you 
know? To poison a rose, then present it as a gift? The lady pricks her ringer, 
then falls dead. I know how to make a candle that will kill if burned in a 
closed room. 


Or how to poison a pillow, or a prayer book I said: 'What about sleeping 
pills?’ 


He glanced at me, annoyed. 

Tm serious. People die from them all the time.’ 

"Where are we going to get sleeping pills?’ 

‘This is Hampden College. If we want sleeping pills, we can get them. 
We looked at each other. 

"How would we give them?" he said. 

'Tell him they're Tylenol.’ 

‘And how do we get him to swallow nine or ten Tylenol?’ 

"We could break them open in a glass of whiskey.’ 


"You think Bunny is likely to drink a glass of whiskey with a lot of white 
powder at the bottom?’ 


'I think he's just as apt to do that as eat a dish of toadstools.' 


There was a long silence, during which a bird trilled noisily outside the 
window. Henry closed his eyes for a long moment and rubbed his temple with 
his fingertips. 


"What are you going to do?'I said. 


'I think I'm going to go out and run a few errands,’ he said. 'I want you to go 
home and go to sleep. 


‘Do you have any ideas?’ 


"No. But there's something I want to look into. I'd drive you back to school, 
but I don't think it's a good idea for us to be seen together just now.’ He began 
to fish in the pocket of his bathrobe, pulling out matches, pen nibs, his blue 
enamel pillbox. Finally he found a couple of quarters and laid them on the 
table. 'Here,’ he said. ‘Stop at the newsstand and buy a paper on your way 
home.’ 


‘Why?’ 


‘In case anyone should wonder why you're wandering around at this hour. I 
may have to talk to you tonight. If I don't find you in, I'll leave a message that 
a Doctor Springfield called. Don't try to get in touch with me before then, 
unless of course you have to.' 


‘Sure.’ 
T'll see you later, then,’ he said, starting out of the kitchen. 


Then he turned in the door and looked at me. Till never forget this, you 
know,' he said matter-offactly. 


‘It's nothing.’ 
‘It's everything and you know it.' 


"You've done me a favor or two yourself,’ I said, but he had already started 
out and didn't hear me. At any rate, he didn't answer. 


I bought a newspaper at the little store down the street and walked back to 
school through the dank, verdant woods, off the main path, stepping over the 
boulders and rotting logs that occasionally blocked my way. 


It was still early when I got to campus. I went in the back door of Monmouth 
and, pausing at the top of the stairs, I was startled to see the house chairperson 
and a flock of girls in housecoats, huddled around the broom closet and 
conversing in varying tones of shrill outrage. When I tried to brush past them, 


Judy Poovey, clad in a black kimono, grabbed my arm. 'Hey,' she said. 
‘Somebody puked in this broom closet.’ 


‘It was one of those goddamned freshmen,’ said a girl at my elbow. 'They get 
stinking drunk and come to the upper-class suites to barf.' 


"Well, 1 don't know who did it,' the house chairperson said, 'but whoever it 
was, they had spaghetti for dinner.’ 


"Hmnn.' 
"That means they're not on the meal ticket, then." 


I pushed through them to my room, locking the door behind me, and went, 
almost immediately, to sleep. 


I slept all day, face down in the pillow, a comfortable dead-man's float only 
remotely disturbed by a chill undertow of reality talk, footsteps, slamming 
doors — which threaded fitfully through the dark, blood-warm waters of 
dream. Day ran into night, and still I slept, until finally the rush and rumble of 
a flushing toilet rolled me on my back and up from sleep. 


The Saturday night party had already started, in Putnam House next door. 
That meant dinner was over, the snack bar was closed, and I'd slept at least 
fourteen hours. My house was deserted. I got up and shaved and took a hot 
bath. Then I put on my robe and, eating an apple I'd found in the house 
kitchen, walked downstairs in my bare feet to see if any messages had been 
left for me by the phone. 


There were three. Bunny Corcoran, at a quarter to six. My mother, from 
California, at eight-forty-five. And a Dr H. Springfield, D. D. S., who 
suggested I visit at my earliest convenience. 


I was famished. When I got to Henry's, I was glad to see that Charles and 
Francis were still picking at a cold chicken and some salad. 


Henry looked as if he hadn't slept since I'd seen him last. He was wearing an 
old tweed jacket with sprung elbows, and there were grass stains on the knees 
of his trousers; khaki gaiters were laced over his mud-caked shoes. 'The plates 
are in the sideboard, if you're hungry,’ he said, pulling out his chair and sitting 
down heavily, like some old farmer just home from the field. 


"Where have you been?’ 


"We'll talk about it after dinner.’ 


"Where's Camilla?’ 

Charles began to laugh. 

Francis put down his chicken leg. ‘She's got a date,' he said. 
"You're kidding. With who?' 

‘Cloke Rayburn.’ 


They're at the party,’ Charles said. 'He took her out for drinks before and 
everything.’ 


"Marion and Bunny are with them,’ Francis said. 'It was Henry's idea. 
Tonight she's keeping an eye on you-know-who.' 


"You-know-who left a message for me on the telephone this afternoon,’ I 
said. 


"You-know-who has been on the warpath all day long,' said Charles, cutting 
himself a slice of bread. 


"Not now, please,’ said Henry in a tired voice. 


After the dishes were cleared Henry put his elbows on the table and lit a 
cigarette. He needed a shave and there were dark circles under his eyes. 


‘So what's the plan?’ said Francis. 

Henry tossed the match into the ashtray. "This weekend,’ he said. Tomorrow,’ 
I paused with my coffee cup halfway to my lips. 

‘Oh my God,’ said Charles, disconcerted. 'So soon?’ 

‘Tt can't wait any longer.’ 

"How? What can we do on such short notice?’ 


T don't like it either, but if we wait we won't have another chance until next 
weekend. If it comes to that, we may not have another chance at all.' 


There was a brief silence. 
This is for real?’ said Charles uncertainly. This is, like, a definite thing?’ 


"Nothing is definite,’ said Henry. The circumstances won't be entirely under 
our control. But I want us to be ready should the opportunity present itself.’ 


‘This sounds sort of indeterminate,’ said Francis. 


It is. It can't be any other way, unfortunately, as Bunny will be doing most of 
the work. 


"How's that?' said Charles, leaning back in his chair. 

"An accident. A hiking accident, to be precise.’ Henry paused. 
"Tomorrow's Sunday.’ 

"Yes. 


‘So tomorrow, if the weather's nice, Bunny will more likely than not go for a 
walk.' 


"He doesn't always go,' said Charles. 
‘Say he does. And we have a fairly good idea of his route.’ 


‘It varies,’ I said. I had accompanied Bunny on a good many of those walks 
the term before. He was apt to cross streams, climb fences, make any number 
of unexpected detours. 


"Yes, of course, but by and large we know it,’ said Henry. He took a piece of 
paper from his pocket and spread it on the table. 


Leaning over, I saw it was a map. 'He goes out the back door of his house, 
circles behind the tennis courts, and when he reaches the woods, heads not 
towards North Hampden but east, towards Mount Cataract. Heavily wooded, 
not much hiking out that way. 


He keeps on till he hits that deer path — you know the one I mean, Richard, 
the trail marked with the white boulder — and bears hard southeast. That runs 
for three-quarters of a mile and then forks ' 


‘But you'll miss him if you wait there,' I said. T've been with him on that 
road. He's as apt to turn west here as to keep heading south.’ 


"Well, we may lose him before then if it comes to that,’ said Henry. ‘I've 
known him to ignore the path altogether and keep heading east till he hits the 
highway. But I'm counting on the likelihood he won't do that. The weather's 
nice — he won't want such an easy walk.' 


‘But the second fork? You can't say where he'll go from there.’ 


"We don't have to. You remember where it comes out, don't you? The ravine.’ 


‘Oh,’ said Francis. 
There was a long silence. 
‘Now, listen,’ said Henry, taking a pencil from his pocket. 


‘He'll be coming in from school, from the south. We can avoid his route 
entirely and come in on Highway 6, from the west.’ 


"We'll take the car?’ 


‘Partway, yes. Just past that junkyard, before the turnoff to Battenkill, there's 
a gravel road. I'd thought it might be a private way, in which case we'd have 
to avoid it, but I went down to the courthouse this afternoon and found that it's 
just an old logging road. Comes to a dead end in the middle of the woods. But 
it should take us directly to the ravine, within a quarter mile. We can walk the 
rest of the way.’ 


‘And when we get there?’ 


"Well, we wait. I made Bunny's walk to the ravine from school twice this 
afternoon, there and back, and timed it both ways. It'll take him at least half an 
hour from the time he leaves his room. 


Which gives us plenty of time to go around the back way and surprise him. 
"What if he doesn't come?’ 

"Well, if he doesn't, we've lost nothing but time.’ 

"What if one of us goes with him?’ 


He shook his head. ‘I've thought of that,’ he said. 'It's not a good idea. If he 
walks into the trap himself — alone, of his own volition — there's not much way 
it can be traced to us.’ 


‘Tf this, if that,’ said Francis sourly. "This sounds pretty haphazard to me.' 
"We want something haphazard.’ 

'I don't see what's wrong with the first plan. 

The first plan is too stylized. Design is inherent in it through and through.’ 
‘But design is preferable to chance.’ 


Henry smoothed the crumpled map against the table with the flat of his palm. 


‘There, you're wrong,’ he said. 'If we attempt to order events too meticulously, 
to arrive at point X via a logical trail, it follows that the logical trail can be 
picked up at point X and followed back to us. Reason is always apparent to a 
discerning eye. But luck? It's invisible, erratic, angelic. What could possibly 
be better, from our point of view, than allowing Bunny to choose the 
circumstances of his own death?' 


Everything was still. Outside, the crickets shrieked with rhythmic, piercing 
monotony. 


Francis — his face moist and very pale — bit his lower lip. 'Let me get this 
straight. We wait at the ravine and just hope he happens to stroll by. And if he 
does, we push him off — right there in broad daylight — and go back home. Am 
I correct?’ 


"More or less,’ said Henry. 
"What if he doesn't come by himself? What if somebody else wanders by?’ 


‘It's no crime to be in the woods on a spring afternoon,’ Henry said. 'We can 
abort at any time, up to the moment he goes over the edge. And that will only 
take an instant. If we happen across anybody on the way to the car —1 think it 
improbable, but if we should — we can always say there's been an accident, 
and we're going for help." 


‘But what if someone sees us?’ 


'I think that extremely unlikely,’ said Henry, dropping a lump of sugar into 
his coffee with a splash. 


‘But possible.’ 


‘Anything is possible, but probability will work for us here if only we let it,’ 
said Henry. 'What are the odds that some previously undetected someone will 
stumble into that very isolated spot, during the precise fraction of a second it 
will take to push him over?’ 


Tt might happen.’ 


‘Anything might happen, Francis. He might be hit by a car tonight, and save 
us all a lot of trouble.’ 


A soft, damp breeze, smelling of rain and apple blossoms, blew through the 
window. I had broken out in a sweat without realizing it and the wind on my 
cheek made me feel clammy and lightheaded. 


Charles cleared his throat and we turned to look at him. 
‘Do you know...» he said. 'I mean, are you sure it's high enough? What if he ' 


'I went out there today with a tape measure,’ Henry said. "The highest point is 
forty-eight feet, which should be ample. The trickiest part will be to get him 
there. If he falls from one of the lower points, he'll end up with nothing worse 
than a broken leg. 


Of course, a lot will rest on the fall itself. Backwards seems better than 
forward for our purposes. 


‘But I've heard of people falling from airplanes and not dying,’ said Francis. 
"What if the fall doesn't kill him?’ 


Henry reached behind his spectacles and rubbed an eye. ‘Well, you know, 
there's a little stream at the bottom,’ he said. 'There's not much water, but 
enough. He'll be stunned, no matter what. 


We'd have to drag him there, hold him face-down for a bit — shouldn't think 
that'd take more than a couple of minutes. If he was conscious, maybe a 
couple of us could even go down and walk him over...’ 


Charles passed a hand over his damp, flushed forehead. 'Oh, Jesus,' he said. 
‘Oh my God. Just listen to us.’ 


"What's the matter?’ 

"Are we insane?’ 

"What are you talking about?’ 

"We're insane. We've lost our minds. How can we possibly do this?’ 
'I don't like the idea any more than you do.’ 

"This is crazy. I don't even know how we can talk about this. 

We've got to think of something else. 


Henry took a sip of his coffee. 'If you can think of anything,’ he said, Td be 
delighted to hear it.’ 


"Well —1 mean, why can't we just leave'? Get in the car tonight and drive 
away?’ 


‘And go where?’ Henry said flatly. 'With what money?’ 


Charles was silent. 
'Now,' said Henry, drawing a line on the map with a pencil. 


'I think it will be fairly easy to get away without being seen, though we 
should be especially careful about turning into the logging road and coming 
out of it onto the highway.’ 


"Will we use my car or yours?’ said Francis. 
"Mine, I think. People tend to look twice at a car like yours. 
"Maybe we should rent one.' 


"No. Something like that might ruin everything. If we keep it as casual as 
possible, no one will give us a second glance. People don't pay attention to 
ninety percent of what they see.' 


There was a pause. 
Charles coughed slightly. ‘And after?' he said. "We just go home?’ 


"We just go home,’ said Henry. He lit a cigarette. 'Really, there's nothing to 
worry about,' he said, shaking out the match. 


‘It seems risky, but if you look at it logically it couldn't be safer. 


It won't look like a murder at all. And who knows we have reason to kill 
him? I know, I know,' he said impatiently when I tried to interrupt. 'But I 
should be extremely surprised if he's told anyone else.’ 


"How can you say what he's done? He could have told half the people at the 
party.’ 


‘But I'm willing to bank on the odds he hasn't. Bunny's unpredictable, of 
course, but at this point his actions still make a kind of rudimentary horse 
sense. I had very good reason to think he'd tell you first.’ 


‘And why's that?’ 


‘Surely you don't think it an accident that, of all the people he might have 
told, he chose to come to you?’ 


'I don't know, except that I was handier than anyone else.’ 


"Who else could he tell?’ said Henry impatiently. 'He'd never go to the police 
outright. He stands to lose as much as we do if he did. And for the same 


reason he doesn't dare tell a stranger. 
Which leaves an extremely limited range of potential confidants. 


Marion, for one. His parents for another. Cloke for a third. Julian as an 
outside possibility. And you.' 


"And what makes you think he hasn't told Marion, for instance?’ 


‘Bunny might be stupid, but not that stupid. It would be all over school by 
lunch the next day. Cloke's a poor choice for different reasons. He isn't quite 
so apt to lose his head but he's untrustworthy all the same. Skittish and 
irresponsible. And very much out for his own interests. Bunny likes him — 
admires him too, I think — but he'd never go to him with something like this. 


And he wouldn't tell his parents, not in a million years. They'd stand behind 
him, certainly, but without a doubt they'd go right to the police.’ 


"And Julian?’ 


Henry shrugged. 'Well, he might tell Julian. I'm perfectly willing to concede 
that. But he hasn't told him yet, and I think the chances are he won't, at least 
not for a while.’ 


"Why not?’ 


Henry raised an eyebrow at me. ‘Because who do you think Julian would be 
more apt to believe?’ 


No one said a thing. Henry drew deeply on his cigarette. 'So,' he said, and 
exhaled. 'Process of elimination. He hasn't told Marion or Cloke, for fear of 
their telling other people. He hasn't told his parents, for the same reason, and 
probably won't except as a last resort. So what possibilities does that leave 
him? Only two. He could tell Julian — who wouldn't believe him — or you, 
who might believe him and wouldn't repeat it.’ 


I stared at him. 'Surmise,' I said at last. 


"Not at all. Do you think, if he'd told anyone else, we'd be sitting here now? 
Do you think now, once he's told you, that he'd be foolhardy enough to tell a 
third party before he even knows what your response will be? Why do you 
suppose he called you this afternoon? Why do you suppose he's pestered the 
rest of us all day?’ 


I didn't answer him. 


‘Because,’ said Henry, ‘he was testing the waters. Last night he was drunk, 


full of himself. Today he's not quite sure what you think. He wants another 
opinion. And he'll look to your response for the cue." 


'I don't understand,’ I said. 
Henry took a sip of his coffee. "What don't you understand?’ 


"Why you're in such a goddamned rush to kill him if you think he won't tell 
anyone but me.' 


He shrugged. 'He hasn't told anyone yet. Which is not to say he won't, very 
soon.' 


"Maybe I could dissuade him.’ 
"That's frankly not a chance I'm willing to take. 
In my opinion, you're talking about taking a much greater one. 


‘Look,’ said Henry evenly, raising his head and fixing me with a bleary gaze. 
‘Forgive me for being blunt, but if you think you have any influence over 
Bunny you're sadly mistaken. He's not particularly fond of you, and, if I may 
speak plainly, as far as I know he never has been. It would be disastrous if you 
of all people tried to intercede.’ 


'I was the one he came to.' 


‘For obvious reasons, none of them very sentimental,’ He shrugged. 'As long 
as I was sure he hadn't told anyone, we might have waited indefinitely. But 
you were the alarm bell, Richard. 


Having told you — nothing happened, he'll think, it wasn't so bad — he'll find 
it twice as easy to tell a second person. And a third. He's taken the first step on 
a downward slope. Now that he has, I feel that we're in for an extremely rapid 
progression of events.’ 


My palms were sweating. In spite of the open window, the room seemed 
close and stuffy. I could hear everybody breathing; quiet, measured breaths 
that came and went with awful regularity, four sets of lungs, eating at the thin 
oxygen. 


Henry folded his fingers and flexed them, at arm's length, until they cracked. 
"You can go now, if you like,' he said to me. 


"Do you want me to?' I said rather sharply. 


"You can stay or not,' he said. 'But there's no reason why you must. I wanted 


to give you a rough idea, but in a certain sense the fewer details you know, the 
better.’ He yawned. 'There were some things you had to know, 1 suppose, but 
I feel I've done you a disservice by involving you this far.’ 


I stood up and looked around the table. 

"Well,' I said. "Well well well.’ 

Francis raised an eyebrow at me. 

"Wish us luck,’ said Henry. 

I clapped him awkwardly on the shoulder. 'Good luck,’ I said. 


Charles — out of Henry's line of vision — caught my eye. He smiled and 
mouthed the words: I'll call you tomorrow, okay? 


Suddenly, and without warning, I was overcome by a rush of emotion. 
Afraid I would say or do something childish, something I'd regret, I got into 
my coat and drank the rest of my coffee in a long gulp and left, without even 
the most perfunctory of goodbyes. 


On my way home through the dark woods, my head down and my hands in 
my pockets, I ran virtually headlong into Camilla. 


She was very drunk and in an exhilarated mood. 


Hello,’ she said, linking her arm through mine and leading me back in the 
direction from which I'd just come. 'Guess what. 


I had a date.' 
'So I heard.’ 


She laughed, a low, sweet chortle that warmed me to my heart. 'Isn't that 
funny?' she said. 'I feel like such a spy. Bunny just went home. Now the 
problem is, I think Cloke kind of likes me.' 


It was so dark I could hardly see her. The weight of her arm was wonderfully 
comfortable, and her gin-sweet breath was warm on my cheek. 


‘Did Cloke behave himself?’ I said. 


"Yes, he was very nice. He bought me dinner and some red drinks that tasted 
like Popsicles.’ 


We emerged from the woods into the deserted, blue-lit streets of North 


Hampden. Everything was silent and strange in the moonlight. A faint breeze 
tinkled in the wind chimes on someone's porch. 


When I stopped walking, she tugged at my arm. ‘Aren't you coming?’ she 
said. 


'No.' 
"Why not?’ 


Her hair was tousled, and her lovely mouth was stained dark by the Popsicle 
drink, and just by looking at her I could tell she didn't have the faintest idea 
what was going on at Henry's. 


She would go with them tomorrow. Somebody would probably tell her that 
she didn't have to go, but she would end up going with them anyway. 


I coughed. 'Look,' I said. 

"What?' 

‘Come home with me.’ 

She lowered her eyebrows. 'Now?' 

"Yes. 

‘Why?’ 

The wind chimes tinkled again; silvery, insidious. 
"Because I want you to." 


She gazed at me with vacant, drunken composure, standing coltlike on the 
outer edge of her black-stockinged foot so the ankle was twisted inward in a 
startling, effortless L. 


Her hand was in mine. I squeezed it hard. Clouds were racing across the 
moon. 


‘Come on,' I said. 


She raised up on tiptoe and gave me a cool, soft kiss that tasted of Popsicles. 
Oh, you, I thought, my heart beating fast and shallow. 


Suddenly, she broke away. T've got to go,' she said. 


"No. Please don't.’ 
Tve got to. They'll wonder where I am.' 


She gave me a quick kiss, then turned and started down the street. I watched 
her until she reached the corner, then dug my hands in my pockets and started 
back home. 


I woke the next day with a start, to chill sunlight and the thump of a stereo 
down the hall. It was late, noon, afternoon maybe; I reached for my watch on 
the night table and started again, more violently this time. It was a quarter of 
three. I jumped out of bed and began to dress, in great haste, without 
bothering to shave or even comb my hair. 


Pulling on my jacket in the hall, I saw Judy Poovey walking briskly towards 
me. She was all dressed up, for Judy, and she had her head to the side 
attempting to fasten an earring. 


"You coming?’ she said when she saw me. 

‘Coming where?’ I said, puzzled, my hand still on the doorknob. 
"What is it with you? Do you live on Mars or what?’ 

I stared at her. 


'The party,’ she said impatiently. ‘Swing into Spring. Up behind Jennings. It 
started an hour ago.’ 


The edges of her nostrils were inflamed and rabbity, and she reached up to 
wipe her nose with a red-taloned hand. 


"Let me guess what you've been doing,’ I said. 


She laughed. 'I have lots more. Jack Teitelbaum drove to New York last 
weekend and came back with a ton. And Laura Stora has Ecstasy, and that 
creepy guy in Durbinstall basement — you know, the chemistry major —just 
cooked up a big batch of meth. 


You're trying to tell me you didn't know about this?’ 
'No.' 


‘Swing into Spring is a big deal. Everybody's been getting ready for months. 
Too bad they didn't have it yesterday, though, the weather was so great. Did 
you go to lunch?’ 


She meant had I been outside yet that day. 'No,' I said. 


"Well, I mean, the weather's okay, but it's a little cold. I walked outside and 
went, like, oh shit. Anyway. You coming?’ 


I looked at her blankly. I'd run out of my room without the slightest idea 
where I was going. 'I need to get something to eat,' 


I said at last. 


‘That's a good idea. Last year I went and I didn't eat anything before and I 
smoked pot and drank, like, thirty martinis. I was all right and everything but 
then I went to Fun O'Rama. Remember? 


That carnival they had — well, I guess you weren't here then. 


Anyway. Big mistake. I'd been drinking all day and I had a sunburn and I 
was with Jack Teitelbaum and all those guys. 


I wasn't going to go, you know, on a ride and then I thought, okay. The 
Ferris wheel. I can go on the Ferris wheel no problem I listened politely to the 
rest of her story which ended, as I knew it would, with Judy being 
pyrotechnically ill behind a hot-dog stand. 


‘So this year, I was like, no way. Stick with coke. Pause that refreshes. By 
the way, you ought to get that friend of yours you know, what's his name — 
Bunny, and make him come with you. He's in the library.’ 


"What?' I said, suddenly all ears. 
"Yeah. Drag him out. Make him do some bong hits or something.’ 
"He's in the library?’ 


"Yeah. I saw him through the window of the reading room a little while ago. 
Doesn't he have a car?’ 


Well, I was thinking, maybe he could drive us. Long walk to Jennings. Or I 
don't know, maybe it's just me. I swear, I'm so out of shape, I have to start 
doing Jane Fonda again.' 


By now it was three. I locked the door and walked to the library, nervously 
jangling my key in my pocket. 


It was a strange, still, oppressive day. The campus seemed deserted — 
everyone was at the party, I supposed — and the green lawn, the gaudy tulips, 
were hushed and expectant beneath the overcast sky. Somewhere a shutter 


creaked. Above my head, in the wicked black claws of an elm, a marooned 
kite rattled convulsively, then was still. This is Kansas, I thought. This is 
Kansas before the cyclone hits. 


The library was like a tomb, illumined from within by a chill fluorescent 
light that, by contrast, made the afternoon seem colder and grayer than it was. 
The windows of the reading room were bright and blank; bookshelves, empty 
carrels, not a soul. 


The librarian — a despicable woman named Peggy — was behind the desk 
reading a copy of Woman's Day, and didn't look up. The Xerox machine 
hummed quietly in the corner. I climbed the stairs to the second floor and 
went around behind the foreign language section to the reading room. It was 
empty, just as I'd thought, but at one of the tables near the front there was an 
eloquent little nest of books, wadded paper, and greasy potato chip bags. 


I went over for a closer look. It had the air of fairly recent abandonment; 
there was a can of grape soda, three-quarters drunk, still sweating and cool to 
the touch. For a moment I wondered what to do — perhaps he'd only gone to 
the bathroom, perhaps he'd be back any second — and I was about to leave 
when I saw the note. 


Lying on top of a volume of the World Book Encyclopedia, a grubby piece 
of lined paper was folded in half, with 'Marion' written on the outer edge in 
Bunny's tiny, crabbed hand. I opened it and read it quickly: old Gal Bored 
stiff. Walked down to the party to get a brewski. See ya later. 


I refolded the note and sat down hard on the arm of Bunny's chair. Bunny 
went on his walks, when he went, around one in the afternoon. It was now 
three. He was at the Jennings party. 


They'd missed him. 


I went down the back steps and out the basement door, then over to 
Commons — its red brick facade flat as a stage backdrop against the empty sky 
— and called Henry from the pay phone. 


No answer. No answer at the twins’, either. 


Commons was deserted except for a couple of haggard old janitors and the 
red-wigged lady who sat at the switchboard and knitted all weekend, paying 
no attention to the incoming calls. 


As usual, the lights were blinking frantically and she had her back to them, 
as oblivious as that ill-omened wireless operator on the Califomian the night 
the Titanic went down. I walked past her down the hall to the vending 


machines, where I got a cup of watery instant coffee before going down to try 
the phone again. 


Still no answer. 


I hung up and wandered back to the deserted common room, with a copy of 
an alumni magazine I'd found in the post office tucked under my arm, and sat 
in a chair by the window to drink my coffee. 


Fifteen minutes passed, then twenty. The alumni magazine was depressing. 
Hampden graduates never seemed to do anything after they got out of school 
but start little ceramics shops in Nantucket or join ashrams in Nepal. I tossed 
it aside and stared blankly out the window. The light outside was very strange. 


Something about it intensified the green of the lawn so all that 2.97 vast 
expanse seemed unnatural, luminous somehow, and not quite of this world. 
An American flag, stark and lonely against the violet sky, whipped back and 
forth on the brass flagpole. 


I sat and stared at it for a minute and then, suddenly, unable to bear it a 
moment longer, I put on my coat and started out towards the ravine. 


The woods were deathly still, more forbidding than I had ever seen them — 
green and black and stagnant, dark with the smells of mud and rot. There was 
no wind; not a bird sang, not a leaf stirred. The dogwood blossoms were 
poised, white and surreal and still against the darkening sky, the heavy air. 


I began to hurry, twigs cracking beneath my feet and my own hoarse breath 
loud in my ears, and before long the path emerged into the clearing. I stood 
there, half-panting, and it was a moment or so before I realized that nobody 
was there. 


The ravine lay to the left — raw, treacherous, a deep plunge to the rocks 
below. Careful not to get too near the edge, I walked to the side for a closer 
look. Everything was absolutely still. I turned again, towards the woods from 
which I had just come. 


Then, to my immense surprise, there was a soft rustle and Charles's head 
rose up out of nowhere. 'Hi!' he called, in a glad whisper. 'What in the world?’ 


‘Shut up,’ said an abrupt voice, and a moment later Henry materialized as if 
by magic, stepping towards me from the underbrush. 


I was speechless, agog. He blinked at me, irritated, and was about to speak 
when there was a sudden crackle of branches and I turned in amazement just 
in time to see Camilla, clad in khaki trousers, clambering down the trunk of a 


tree. 
"What's going on?’ I heard Francis say, somewhere very close. 
‘Can I have a cigarette now?’ 


Henry didn't answer. 'What are you doing here?’ he said in a very annoyed 
tone of voice. 


‘There's a party today. 
"What?' 
'A party. He's there now.’ I paused. 'He's not going to come.’ 


‘See, I told you,' said Francis, aggrieved, stepping gingerly from the brush 
and wiping his hands. Characteristically, he was not dressed for the occasion 
and had on sort of a nice suit. 


"Nobody listens to me. I said we should have left an hour ago.' 
"How do you know he's at the party?’ said Henry. 
‘He left a note. In the library. 


‘Let's go home,' said Charles, wiping a muddy smudge off his cheek with the 
heel of his hand. 


Henry wasn't paying any attention to him. 'Damn,' he said, and shook his 
head quickly, like a dog shaking off water. 'I'd so hoped we'd be able to get it 
over with. 


There was a long pause. 

T'm hungry,’ said Charles. 

‘Starving,’ Camilla said absently, and then her eyes widened. 

‘Oh, no.’ 

"What is it?’ said everyone at once. 

‘Dinner. Tonight's Sunday. He's coming to our house for dinner tonight.’ 
There was a gloomy silence. 


'I never thought about it,' Charles said. 'Not once.’ 


'I didn't either,’ said Camilla. 'And we don't have a thing to eat at home.’ 
"We'll have to stop at the grocery store on the way back.' 

"What can we get?’ 

'I don't know. Something quick.’ 


'I can't believe you two,' Henry said crossly. 'I reminded you of this last 
night.' 


"But we forgot,’ said the twins, in simultaneous despair. 
"How could you?’ 


"Well, if you wake up intending to murder someone at two o'clock, you 
hardly think what you're going to feed the corpse for dinner.’ 


"Asparagus is in season,’ said Francis helpfully. 

"Yes, but do they have it at the Food King?’ 

Henry sighed and started off towards the woods. 

"Where are you going?’ Charles said in alarm. 

T'm going to dig up a couple of ferns. Then we can leave." 


‘Oh, let's just forget about it,’ said Francis, lighting a cigarette and tossing 
away the match. 'Nobody's going to see us.’ 


Henry turned around. 'Somebody might. If they do, I certainly want to have 
an excuse for having been here. And pick up that match,’ he said sourly to 
Francis, who blew out a cloud of smoke and glared at him. 


It was getting darker by the minute and cold, too. I buttoned my jacket and 
sat on a damp rock that overlooked the ravine, staring at the muddy, leaf- 
clogged rill that trickled below and half-listening to the twins argue about 
what they were going to make for dinner. Francis leaned against a tree, 
smoking. After a while he put out the cigarette on the sole of his shoe and 
came over to sit beside me. 


Minutes passed. The sky was so overcast it was almost purple. 


A wind swayed through a luminous clump of birches on the opposite bank, 
and I shivered. The twins were arguing monotonously. 


Whenever they were in moods like this — disturbed, upset — they tended to 
sound like Heckle and Jeckle. 


All of a sudden Henry emerged from the woods in a flurry of underbrush, 
wiping his dirt-caked hands on his trousers. ‘Somebody's coming,’ he said 
quietly. 


The twins stopped talking and blinked at him. 
"What?' said Charles. 
‘Around the back way. Listen.’ 


We were quiet, looking at each other. A chilly breeze rustled through the 
woods and a gust of white dogwood petals blew into the clearing. 


'I don't hear anything,’ Francis said. 


Henry put a finger to his lips. The five of us stood poised, waiting, for a 
moment longer. I took a breath, and was about to speak when all of a sudden I 
did hear something. 


Footsteps, the crackle of branches. We looked at one another. 


Henry bit his lip and glanced quickly around. The ravine was bare, no place 
to hide, no way for the rest of us to run across the clearing and into the woods 
without making a lot of noise. He was about to say something when all of a 
sudden there was a crash of bushes, very near, and he stepped out of the 
clearing between two trees, like someone ducking into a doorway on a city 
street. 


The rest of us, stranded in the open, looked at each other and then at Henry — 
thirty feet away, safe at the shady margin of the wood. He waved at us 
impatiently. I heard the sudden crunch of footsteps on gravel and, hardly 
aware of what I was doing, turned away spasmodically and pretended to 
inspect the trunk of a nearby tree. 


The footsteps approached. Prickles rising on the nape of my neck, I bent to 
scrutinize the tree trunk more closely: silvery bark, cool to the touch, ants 
marching out of a fissure in a glittering black thread. 


Then — almost before I noticed it — the footsteps stopped, very near my back. 


I glanced up and saw Charles. He was staring straight ahead with a ghastly 
expression on his face and I was on the verge of asking him what was the 
matter when, with a sick, incredulous rush of disbelief, I heard Bunny's voice 


directly behind me. 


"Well, I'll be damned,' he said briskly. "What's this? Meeting of the Nature 
Club?’ 


I turned. It was Bunny, all right, all six-foot-three of him, looming up behind 
me in a tremendous yellow rain slicker that came almost to his ankles. 


There was an awful silence. 
‘Hi, Bun,’ said Camilla faintly. 


‘Hi yourself.’ He had a bottle of beer — a Rolling Rock, funny I remember 
that — and he turned it up and took a long, gurgling pull. ‘Phew,’ he said. 'You 
people sure do a lot of sneaking around in the woods these days. You know, 
he said, poking me in the ribs, T've been trying to get ahold of you. 


The abrupt, booming immediacy of his presence was too much for me to 
take. I stared at him, dazed, as he drank again, as he lowered the bottle, as he 
wiped his mouth with the back of his hand; he was standing so close I could 
feel the heaviness of his rich, beery breaths. 


'Aaah,' he said, raking the hair back from his eyes, and belched. 


‘So what's the story, deerslayers? You all just felt like coming out here to 
study the vegetation?’ 


There was a rustle and a slight, deprecating cough from the direction of the 
woods. 


"Well, not exactly,’ said a cool voice. 


Bunny turned, startled —1 did, too — just in time to see Henry step out of the 
shadows. 


He came forward and regarded Bunny pleasantly. He was holding a garden 
trowel and his hands were black with mud. 


‘Hello,’ he said. 'This is quite a surprise.’ 


Bunny gave him a long, hard look. 'Jesus,' he said. 'What you doing, burying 
the dead?’ 


Henry smiled. ‘Actually, it's very lucky you happened by.' 


'This some kind of convention?’ 


"Why, yes,’ said Henry agreeably, after a pause. 'I suppose one might call it 
that. 


‘One might,’ said Bunny mockingly. 


Henry bit his lower lip. 'Yes,' he said, in all seriousness. 'One might. Though 
it's not the term I would use myself Everything was very still. From 
somewhere far away, in the woods, I heard the faint, inane laughter of a 
woodpecker. 


"Tell me,’ Bunny said, and I thought I detected for the first time a note, of 
suspicion. ‘Just what the Sam Hill arc you guys doing out here anyway?’ 


The woods were silent, not a sound. 


Henry smiled. "Why, looking for new ferns,’ he said, and took a step towards 
him. 


Book II ^ 


Dionysus is the Master of Illusions, who could make a vine grow out of a 
ship's plank, and in general enable his votaries to see the world as the world's 
not. 


— E. R. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational 


Chapter 6 ^ 


Just for the record, I do not consider myself an evil person (though how like 
a killer that makes me sound!). Whenever I read about murders in the news I 
am struck by the dogged, almost touching assurance with which interstate 
stranglers, needle-happy pediatricians, the depraved and guilty of all 
descriptions fail to recognize the evil in themselves; feel compelled, even, to 
assert a kind of spurious decency. 'Basically I am a very good person.’ This 
from the latest serial killer — destined for the chair, they say — who, with 
incarnadine axe, recently dispatched half a dozen registered nurses in Texas. I 
have followed his case with interest in the papers. 


But while I have never considered myself a very good person, neither can I 
bring myself to believe that I am a spectacularly bad one. Perhaps it's simply 
impossible to think of oneself in such a way, our Texan friend being a case in 
point. What we did was terrible, but still I don't think any of us were bad, 
exactly; chalk it up to weakness on my part, hubris on Henry's, too much 
Greek prose composition — whatever you like. 


I don't know. I suppose I should have had a better idea of what I was letting 
myself in for. Still, the first murder — the farmer — seemed to have been so 
simple, a dropped stone falling to the lakebed with scarcely a ripple. The 
second one was also easy, at least at first, but I had no inkling how different it 
would be. What we took for a docile, ordinary weight (gentle plunk, swift 
rush to the bottom, dark waters closing over it without a trace) was in fact a 
depth charge, one that exploded quite without warning beneath the glassy 
surface, and the repercussions of which may not be entirely over, even now. 


Towards the end of the sixteenth century, the Italian physicist Galileo Galilei 
did a variety of experiments on the nature of falling bodies, dropping objects 
(so they say) from the Tower of Pisa in order to measure the rate of 
acceleration as they fell. His findings were as follows: That falling bodies 
acquire speed as they fall. That the farther a body falls, the faster it moves. 
That the velocity of a falling body equals the acceleration due to gravity 
multiplied by the time of the fall in seconds. In short, that given the variables 
in our case, our particular falling body was traveling at a speed greater than 
thirty-two feet per second when it hit the rocks below. 


You see, then, how quick it was. And it is impossible to slow down this film, 
to examine individual frames. I see now what I saw then, flashing by with the 
swift, deceptive ease of an accident: shower of gravel, windmilling arms, a 
hand that claws at a branch and misses. A barrage of frightened crows 
explodes from the underbrush, cawing and dark against the sky. Cut to Henry, 


stepping back from the edge. Then the film flaps up in the projector and the 
screen goes black. Consummation est. 


If, lying in my bed at night, I find myself unwilling audience to this 
objectionable little documentary (it goes away when I open my eyes but 
always, when I close them, it resumes tirelessly at the very beginning), I 
marvel at how detached it is in viewpoint, eccentric in detail, largely devoid 
of emotional power. In that way it mirrors the remembered experience more 
closely than one might imagine. Time, and repeated screenings, have 
endowed the memory with a menace the original did not possess. I watched it 
all happen quite calmly — without fear, without pity, without anything but a 
kind of stunned curiosity — so that the impression of the event is burned 
indelibly upon my optic nerves, but oddly absent from my heart. 


It was many hours before I was cognizant of what we'd done; days (months? 
years?) before I began to comprehend the magnitude of it. I suppose we'd 
simply thought about it too much, talked of it too often, until the scheme 
ceased to be a thing of the imagination and took on a horrible life of its own... 


Never, never once in any immediate sense, did it occur to me that any of this 
was anything but a game. An air of unreality suffused even the most workaday 
details, as if we were plotting not the death of a friend but the itinerary of a 
fabulous trip that I, for one, never quite believed we'd ever really take. 


What is unthinkable is undoable. That is something that Julian used to say in 
our Greek class, and while I believe he said it in order to encourage us to be 
more rigorous in our mental habits, it has a certain perverse bearing on the 
matter at hand. The idea of murdering Bunny was horrific, impossible; 
nonetheless we dwelt on it incessantly, convinced ourselves there was no 
alternative, devised plans which seemed slightly improbable and ridiculous 
but which actually worked quite well when put to the test... I don't know. A 
month or two before, I would have been appalled at the idea of any murder at 
all. But that Sunday afternoon, as I actually stood watching one, it seemed the 
easiest thing in the world. How quickly he fell; how soon it was over. 


This part, for some reason, is difficult for me to write, largely because the 
topic is inextricably associated with too many nights like this one (sour 
stomach, wretched nerves, clock inching tediously from four to five). It is also 
discouraging, because I recognize attempts at analysis are largely useless. I 
don't know why we did it. I'm not entirely sure that, circumstances 
demanding, we wouldn't do it again. And if I'm sorry, in a way, that probably 
doesn't make much difference. 


I am sorry, as well, to present such a sketchy and disappointing exegesis of 
what is in fact the central part of my story. I have noticed that even the most 


garrulous and shameless of murderers are shy about recounting their crimes. 
A few months ago, in an airport bookstore, I picked up the autobiography of a 
notorious 3ii thrill killer and was disheartened to find it entirely bereft of lurid 
detail. At the points of greatest suspense (rainy night; deserted street; fingers 
closing around the lovely neck of Victim Number Four) it would suddenly, 
and not without some coyness, switch to some entirely unrelated matter. (Was 
the reader aware that an IQ test had been given him in prison? That his score 
had been gauged as being close to that of Jonas Salk?) By far the major 
portion of the book was devoted to spinsterish discourses on prison life — bad 
food, hijinks in the exercise yard, tedious little jailbird hobbies. It was a waste 
of five dollars. 


In a certain way, though, I know how my colleague feels. Not that 
everything ‘went black,' nothing of the sort; only that the event itself is cloudy 
because of some primitive, numbing effect that obscured it at the time; the 
same effect, I suppose, that enables panicked mothers to swim icy rivers, or 
rush into burning houses, for a child; the effect that occasionally allows a 
deeply bereaved person to make it through a funeral without a single tear. 
Some things are too terrible to grasp at once. Other things — naked, sputtering, 
indelible in their horror — are too terrible to really ever grasp at all. It is only 
later, in solitude, in memory, that the realization dawns: when the ashes are 
cold; when the mourners have departed; when one looks around and finds 
oneself- quite to one's surprise — in an entirely different world. 


When we got back to the car it had not yet begun to snow, but already the 
woods shrank beneath the sky, hushed and waiting, as if they could sense the 
weight of the ice that would be on them by nightfall. 


‘Christ, look at this mud,' said Francis as we bounced through yet another 
pothole, brown spray striking the window with a thick rataplan. 


Henry shifted down into first. 


Another pothole, one that rattled the teeth in my head. As we tried to come 
out of it the tires whined, kicking up fresh splatters of mud, and we fell back 
into it with a jolt. Henry swore, and put the car in reverse. 


Francis rolled down his window and craned his head outside to see. 'Oh, 
Jesus,' I heard him say. ‘Stop the car. There's no way we're going to ' 


"We're not stuck.’ 
"Yes we are. You're making it worse. Christ, Henry. Stop the ' 


‘Shut up,' Henry said. 


The tires whined in the back. The twins, sitting on either side of me, turned 
to look out the rear window at the muddy spray. 


Abruptly, Henry shifted into first, and with a sudden leap that made my heart 
glad we were clear of the hole. 


Francis slumped back in his seat. He was a cautious driver, and riding in the 
car with Henry, even in the most propitious of circumstances, made him 
nervous. 


Once in town, we drove to Francis's apartment. The twins and I were to split 
up and walk home — me to campus, the twins to their apartment — while Henry 
and Francis took care of the car. 


Henry turned off the engine. The silence was eerie, jolting. 

He looked at me in the rear-view mirror. 'We need to talk a minute,’ he said. 
"What is it?’ 

"When did you leave your room?’ 

‘About a quarter of three. 

‘Did anyone see you?’ 

‘Not really. Not that I know of.’ 


Cooling down after its long drive, the car ticked and hissed and settled 
contentedly on its frame. Henry was silent for a moment, and he was about to 
speak when Francis suddenly pointed out the window. 'Look,' he said. 'Is that 
snow? 


The twins leaned low to see. Henry, biting his lower lip, paid no attention. 
"The four of us,’ he said, at last, 'were at a matinee at the Orpheum in town — a 
double feature that ran from one o'clock to four-fifty-five. Afterwards we went 
on a short drive, returning’ — he checked his watch — 'at five-fifteen. That 
accounts for us, all right. I'm not sure what to do about you.’ 


"Why can't I say I was with you?' 
"Because you weren't.’ 
"Who'll know the difference?’ 


'The ticket girl at the Orpheum, that's who. We went down and bought 
tickets for the afternoon show, paid for them with a hundred-dollar bill. She 


remembers us, I can assure you of that. 


We sat in the balcony and slipped out the emergency exit about fifteen 
minutes into the first movie.' 


"Why couldn't I have met you there?’ 


"You could have, except you don't have a car. And you can't say you took a 
cab because that can be easily checked. Besides, you were out walking 
around. You say you were in Commons before you met us?’ 


'Yes.' 


'Then I suppose there's nothing you can say except that you went straight 
home. It's not an ideal story, but at this point you don't have any alternative to 
speak of. We'll have to imagine you met up with us at some point after the 
movie, in the quite likely event that someone has seen you. Say we called you 
at five o'clock and met you in the parking lot. You rode with us to Francis's — 
really, this doesn't follow very smoothly, but it'll have to do — and walked 
home again.’ 


"All right.’ 


"When you get home, check downstairs in case any phone messages were left 
for you between three-thirty and five. If there were, we'll have to think of 
some reason why you didn't take the calls.’ 


"Look, you guys,’ Charles said. 'It's really snowing.’ 
Tiny flakes, just visible at the tops of the pines. 


‘One more thing,’ said Henry. 'We don't want to behave as if we're waiting 
around to hear some momentous piece of news. 


Go home. Read a book. I don't think we ought to try to contact 3i4 one 
another tonight — unless, of course, it's absolutely necessary.’ 


Tve never seen it snow this late in the year.' Francis was looking out the 
window. ‘Yesterday it was nearly seventy degrees.’ 


"Were they predicting it?' Charles said. 
‘Not that I heard.’ 
‘Christ. Look at this. It's almost Easter.’ 


'I don't see why you're so excited,’ Henry said crossly. He had a pragmatic, 


farmer-like knowledge of how weather conditions affected growth, 
germination, blooming times, et cetera. 'It's just going to kill all the flowers.’ 


I walked home fast, because I was cold. A November stillness was settling 
like a deadly oxymoron on the April landscape. Snow was falling in earnest 
now — big silent petals drifting through the springtime woods, white bouquets 
segueing into snowy dark: a nightmarish topsy-turvy land, something from a 
story book. My path took me beneath a row of apple trees, full-blown and 
luminous, shivering in the twilight like an avenue of pale umbrellas. The big 
white flakes wafted through them, dreamy and soft. I did not stop to look, 
however, only hurried beneath them even faster. My winter in Hampden had 
given me a horror of snow. 


There were no messages for me downstairs. I went up to my room, changed 
my clothes, couldn't decide what to do with the ones I'd taken off, thought of 
washing them, wondered if it might look suspicious, finally stuffed them all at 
the very bottom of my laundry bag. Then I sat down on my bed and looked at 
the clock. 


It was time for dinner and I hadn't eaten all day but I wasn't hungry. I went to 
the window and watched the snowflakes whirl in the high arcs of light above 
the tennis courts, then crossed over and sat upon my bed again. 


Minutes ticked by. Whatever anesthesia had carried me through the event 
was starting to wear off and with each passing second the thought of sitting 
around all night, alone, was seeming more and more unbearable. I turned on 
the radio, switched it off, tried to read. When I found I couldn't hold my 
attention on one book I tried another. Scarcely ten minutes had passed. I 
picked up the first book and put it down again. Then, against my better 
judgment, I went downstairs to the pay phone and dialed Francis's number. 


He answered on the first ring. 'Hi,' he said, when I told him it was me. 'What 
is it?’ 


"Nothing. 
‘Are you sure?’ 


I heard Henry murmuring in the background. Francis, his mouth away from 
the receiver, said something that I couldn't catch. 


"What are you guys doing?’ I said. 


"Not much. Having a drink. Hold on a second, would you?’ he said, in 
response to another murmur. 


There was a pause, an indistinct exchange, and then Henry's brisk voice 
came on the line. 'What's the matter? Where are you?’ he said. 


‘At home.' 

"What's wrong?’ 

'I just wondered if maybe I could come over for a drink or something.’ 
‘That's not a good idea. I was just leaving when you called.’ 

"What are you going to do?’ 

"Well, if you want to know the truth, I'm going to take a bath and go to bed.' 
The line was silent for a moment. 

‘Are you still there?’ Henry said. 

‘Henry, I'm going crazy. I don't know what I'm going to do.’ 


"Well, do anything you like,’ Henry said amiably. 'As long as you stick pretty 
close to home.’ 


'I don't see what difference it would make if I ' 


"When you're worried about something,’ said Henry abruptly, ‘have you ever 
tried thinking in a different language?’ 


"What?' 
It slows you down. Keeps your thoughts from running wild. 


A good discipline in any circumstance. Or you might try doing what the 
Buddhists do." 


"What?’ 


In the practice of Zen there is an exercise called zazen similar, I think, to the 
Theravadic practice of vipassana. One sits facing a blank wall. No matter the 
emotion one feels, no matter how strong or violent, one remains motionless. 
Facing the wall. 


The discipline, of course, is in continuing to sit.’ 


There was a silence, during which I struggled for language to adequately 
express what I thought of this goofball advice. 


"Now, listen,’ he continued, before I could say anything. 'I'm exhausted. I'll 
see you in class tomorrow, all right?’ 


‘Henry,’ I said, but he'd hung up. 


In a sort of trance, I walked upstairs. I wanted a drink badly but I had 
nothing to drink. I sat down on my bed and looked out the window. 


My sleeping pills were all gone. I knew they were gone but I went to my 
bureau and checked the bottle just in case. It was empty except for some 
vitamin C tablets I'd got from the infirmary. 


Little white pills. I poured them on my desk, arranged them in patterns and 
then I took one, hoping that the reflex of swallowing would make me feel 
better, but it didn't. 


I sat very still, trying not to think. It seemed as if I was waiting for 
something, I wasn't sure what, something that would lift the tension and make 
me feel better, though I could imagine no possible event, in past, present, or 
future, that would have either effect. It seemed as if an eternity had passed. 
Suddenly, I was struck by a horrible thought: is this what it's like? Is this the 
way it's going to be from now on? 


I looked at the clock. Scarcely a minute had gone by. I got up, not bothering 
to lock the door behind me, and went down the hall to Judy's room. 


By some miracle, she was in — drunk, putting on lipstick. 'Hi, she said, 
without glancing away from the mirror. 'Want to go to « a party?’ 


I don't know what I said to her, something about not feeling well. 


‘Have a bagel,’ she said, turning her head from side to side and examining 
her profile. 


Td rather a sleeping pill, if you've got one. 


She screwed the lipstick down, snapped on the top, then opened the drawer 
of her dressing table. It was not actually a dressing table but a desk, college- 
issue, just like the one in my room; but like some savage unable to understand 
its true purpose — transforming it into a weapon rack, say, or a flower-decked 
fetish — she had painstakingly turned it into a cosmetics area, with a glass top 
and a ruffled satin skirt and a three-way mirror on the top that lit up. 
Scrabbling through a nightmare of compacts and pencils, she pulled out a 
prescription bottle, held it to the light, tossed it into the trash can and selected 
a new one. 'This'll do,' she said, handing it to me. 


I examined the bottle. There were two drab tablets at the bottom. All the 
label said was for pain. 


I said, annoyed, 'What is this? Anacin or something?’ 

"Try one. They're okay. This weather's pretty wild, huh?’ 
"Yeah,' I said, swallowing a pill and handing the bottle back. 
‘Don't worry, keep it,’ she said, already returned to her toilette. 


"Man. All it does here is fucking snow. I don't know why the hell I ever came 
here. You want a beer?’ 


She had a refrigerator in her room, in the closet. I fought my way through a 
jungle of belts and hats and lacy shirts to get to it. 


'No, I don't want one,’ she said when I held one out to her. 
"Too fucked up. You didn't go to the party, did you?’ 
'No,' I said, and then stopped, the beer bottle at my lips. 


There was something about the taste of it, the smell, and then I remembered: 
Bunny, the beer on his breath; spilled beer foaming on the ground. The bottle 
clattering after him down the slope. 


‘Smart move, said Judy. 'It was cold and the band stunk. I saw your friend, 
what's-his-name. The Colonel.’ 


"What?’ 


She laughed. "You know. Laura Stora calls him that. She used to live next 
door to him and he irritated the shit out of her playing these John Philip Sousa 
marching records all the time." 


She meant Bunny. I set the bottle down. 


But Judy, thank God, was busy with the eyebrow pencil. "You know,’ she 
said, 'I think Laura has an eating disorder, not anorexia, but that Karen 
Carpenter thing where you make yourself puke. 


Last night I went with her and Trace to the Brasserie, and, I'm totally serious, 
she stuffed herself until she could not breathe. Then she went in the men's 
room to barf and Tracy and I were looking at each other, like, is this normal? 
Then Trace told me, well, you remember that time Laura was supposedly in 
the hospital for mono? Well. The story is that actually...’ 


She rattled on. I stared at her, lost in my own awful thoughts. 


Suddenly I realized she'd stopped talking. She was looking at me 
expectantly, waiting for a reply. 


"What?' I said. 
'I said, isn't that the most retarded thing you ever heard?’ 
'Ummmm.' 


"Her parents just must not give a shit.' She closed the makeup drawer and 
turned to face me. 'Anyway. You want to come to this party?’ 


"Whose is it?’ 


‘Jack Teitelbaum's, you airhead. Durbinstall basement. Sid's band is 
supposed to play, and Moffat's back on the drums. And somebody said 
something about a go-go dancer in a cage. Come on.' 


For some reason I was unable to answer her. Unconditional refusal to Judy's 
invitations was a reflex so deeply ingrained that it was hard to force myself to 
say yes. Then I thought of my room. Bed, bureau, desk. Books lying open 
where I'd left them. 


‘Come on, she said coquettishly. 'You never go out with me.' 
‘All right,’ I said at last. 'Let me get my coat.' 
Only much later did I find out what Judy had given me: Demerol. 


By the time we got to the party it had started to kick in. Angles, colors, the 
riot of snowflakes, the din of Sid's band — everything was soft and kind and 
infinitely forgiving. I noted a strange beauty in the faces of people previously 
repulsive to me. I smiled at everyone and everyone smiled back. 


Judy (Judy! God bless her!) left me with her friend Jack Teitelbaum and a 
fellow named Lars and went off to get us a drink. 


Everything was bathed in a celestial light. I listened to Jack and Lars talk 
about pinball, motorcycles, female kick-boxing, and was heartwarmed at their 
attempts to include me in the conversation. 


Lars offered me a bong hit. The gesture was, to me, tremendously touching 
and all of a sudden I realized I had been wrong about these people. These 
were good people, common people; the salt of the earth; people whom I 
should count myself fortunate to know. 


I was trying to think of some way to vocalize this epiphany when Judy came 
back with the drinks. I drank mine, wandered off to get another, found myself 
roaming in a fluid, pleasant daze. 


Someone gave me a cigarette. Jud and Frank were there, Jud with a 
cardboard crown from Burger King on his head. This crown was oddly 
flattering to him. Head thrown back and howling with laughter, brandishing a 
tremendous mug of beer, he looked like Cuchulain, Brian Boru, some mythic 
Irish king. 


Cloke Rayburn was shooting pool in the back room. Just outside his line of 
vision, I watched him chalk the cue, unsmiling, and bend over the table so his 
hair fell in his face. Click. The colored balls spun out in all directions. Flecks 
of light swam in my eyes. 


I thought of atoms, molecules, things so small you couldn't even see them. 


Then I remember feeling dizzy, pushing through the crowd 32,0 to try to get 
some air. I could see the door propped invitingly with a cinder block, could 
feel a cold draft on my face. Then — I don't know, I must've blacked out, 
because the next thing I knew my back was against a wall, in an entirely 
different place, and a strange girl was talking to me. 


Gradually I understood that I must have been standing there with her for 
some time. I blinked, and struggled gamely to bring her into focus. Very 
pretty, in a snub-nosed, good-natured way; dark hair, freckles, light blue eyes. 
I had seen her earlier, somewhere, in line at the bar maybe, had seen her 
without paying her much attention. And now here she was again, like an 
apparition, drinking red wine from a plastic cup and calling me by name. 


I couldn't make out what she was saying, though the timbre of her voice was 
clear even over the noise: cheerful, raucous, oddly pleasant. I leaned forward 
— she was a small girl, barely five feet — and cupped a hand to my ear. What?’ 
I said. 


She laughed, stretched up on tiptoe, brought her face close to mine. Perfume. 
Hot thunder of whisper against my cheek. 


I grabbed her by the wrist. ‘It's too noisy, I said in her ear; my lips brushed 
against her hair. ‘Let's go outside.’ 


She laughed again. 'But we just came in,' she said. 'You said you were 
freezing.’ 


Hmmn, I thought. Her eyes were pale, bored, regarding me with a kind of 
intimate amusement in the jaded light. 


‘Somewhere quiet, I mean, I said. 


She turned up her glass and looked at me through the bottom of it. "Your 
room or mine? 


"Yours,' I said, without a moment's hesitation. 


She was a good girl, a good sport. Sweet chuckles in the dark and her hair 
falling across my face, funny little catches in her breath like the girls back in 
high school. The warm feel of a body in my arms was something I'd almost 
forgotten. How long since I'd kissed anyone that way? Months, and more 
months. 


Strange to think how simple things could be. A party, some « drinks, a pretty 
stranger. That was the way most of my classmates ' lived — talking rather self- 
consciously at breakfast about their liaisons of the previous night, as if this 
harmless, homey little vice, which fell somewhere below drink and above 
gluttony in the catalogue of sins, was somehow the abyss of depravity and 
dissipation. 


Posters; dried flowers in a beer mug; the luminous glow of her stereo in the 
dark. It was all too familiar from my suburban youth, yet now seemed 
unbelievably remote and innocent, a memory from some lost Junior Prom. 
Her lip gloss tasted like bubble gum. I buried my face in the soft, slightly 
acrid-smelling flesh of her neck and rocked her back and forth — babbling, 
mumbling, feeling myself fall down and down, into a dark, half-forgotten life. 
J| I woke at two-thirty — according to the flashing, demonic red of a digital 
clockface — in an absolute panic. I'd had a dream, nothing scary really, in 
which Charles and I were on a train, trying to evade a mysterious third 
passenger. The cars were packed with people from the parry — Judy, Jack 
Teitelbaum, Jud in his cardboard crown — as we lurched through the aisles. 
Throughout the dream, however, I'd had a feeling that it was all unimportant, 
that I actually had a far more pressing worry if only I could remember it. Then 
I did remember, and the shock of it woke me up. 


It was like waking from a nightmare to a worse nightmare. I sat up, heart 
pounding, slapping at the blank wall for the light switch until the terrible 
realization dawned on me that I was not in my own room. Strange shapes, 
unfamiliar shadows, crowded horribly around me; nothing offered any clue to 
my whereabouts, and for a few delirious moments I wondered if I was dead. 
Then I felt the sleeping body next to mine. Instinctively I recoiled, and then I 
prodded it gently with my elbow. It didn't move. I lay in bed for a minute or 
two, trying to collect my thoughts; then I got up, found my clothes, dressed as 
best as I could in the dark, and left. 


Stepping outside, I slipped on an icy step and pitched, face forward, into 
more than a foot of snow. I lay still for a moment, then raised myself to my 
knees and looked about in disbelief. A few snowflakes were one thing, but I 
had not thought it possible for weather to change as suddenly and violently as 
this. The flowers were buried, and the lawn; everything had disappeared. 


An expanse of clean, unbroken snow stretched blue and twinkling as far as I 
could see. 


My hands were raw and my elbow felt bruised. With some effort, I got to my 
feet. When I turned to see where I'd come from, I was horrified to realize I'd 
just walked out of Bunny's own dorm. His window, on the ground floor, 
stared back at me black and silent. I thought of his spare glasses lying on the 
desk; the empty bed; the family photographs smiling in the dark. 


When I got back to my room — by a confused, circular route —1 fell on my 
bed without taking off my coat or shoes. The lights were on, and I felt weirdly 
exposed and vulnerable but I didn't want to turn them off. The bed was 
rocking a little, like a raft, and I kept a foot on the floor to steady it. 


Then I fell asleep, and slept very soundly for a couple of hours until I was 
awakened by a knock at the door. Seized by fresh panic, I fought to sit up in 
the tangle of my coat, which had somehow got twisted around my knees and 
seemed to be attacking me with the force of a living creature. 


The door creaked open. Then no sound at all. "What the hell is wrong with 
you?’ said a sharp voice. 


Francis was in the doorway. He stood with one black-gloved hand on the 
knob, looking at me like I was a lunatic. 


I stopped struggling and fell back on my pillow. I was so glad to see him I 
felt like laughing, and I was so doped up I probably did. ‘Francois,’ I said 
idiotically. 


He shut the door and came over to my bed, where he stood looking down at 
me. It was really him — snow in his hair, snow on the shoulders of his long 
black overcoat. 'Are you okay?’ he said, after a long, derisive pause. 


I rubbed my eyes and tried again. 'Hi,' I said. 'I'm sorry. I'm fine. Really.’ 
He stood looking at me with no expression and did not answer. 


Then he took off his coat and laid it over the back of a chair. 'Do you want 
some tea?’ he said. 


'No.' 
"Well, I'm going to go make some, if you don't mind.’ 


By the time he was back I was more or less myself. He put the kettle on the 
radiator and helped himself to some tea bags from my bureau drawer. 'Here,' 
he said. 'You can have the good teacup. There wasn't any milk in the kitchen. 


It was a relief to have him there. I sat up and drank my tea and watched him 
take offhis shoes and socks. Then he put them by the radiator to dry. His feet 
were long and thin, too long for his slim, bony ankles; he flexed his toes, 
looked up at me. ‘It's an awful night,’ he said. 'Have you been outside?’ 


I told him a little about my night, omitting the part about the girl. 


‘Gosh,’ he said, reaching up to loosen his collar. 'I've just been sitting in my 
apartment. Giving myself the creeps.’ 


"Heard from anyone?’ 
"No. My mother called around nine; I couldn't talk to her. 
Told her I was writing a paper.’ 


For some reason my eyes strayed to his hands, fidgeting unconsciously on 
the top of my desk. He saw that I saw, forced them down, palms flat. 'Nerves,' 
he said. 


We sat for a while without saying anything. I put my teacup on the 
windowsill and leaned back. The Demerol had set off some kind of weird 
Doppler effect in my head, like the whine of car tires speeding past and 
receding in the distance. I was staring I across the room in a daze — how long, 
I don't know — when gradually I became aware that Francis was looking at me 
with an intent, fixed expression on his face. I mumbled something and got up 
and went to the bureau to get an Alka-Seltzer. 


The sudden movement made me feel light-headed. I was standing there 
dully, wondering where I'd put the box, when all of a sudden I became aware 
that Francis was immediately behind me, and I turned around. 


His face was very close to mine. To my surprise he put his hands on my 
shoulders and leaned forward and kissed me, right on the mouth. 


It was a real kiss — long, slow, deliberate. He'd caught me off balance and I 
grabbed his arm to keep from falling; sharply, he drew in his breath and his 
hands went down to my back and before I knew it, more from reflex than 


anything else, I was kissing him, too. His tongue was sharp. His mouth had a 
bitter, mannish taste, like tea and cigarettes. 


He pulled away, breathing hard, and leaned to kiss my throat. 
I looked rather wildly around the room. God, I thought, what a night. 
‘Look, Francis,’ I said, 'cut it out.’ 


He was undoing the top button of my collar. "You idiot,’ he said, chuckling. 
‘Did you know your shirt's on inside-out?’ 


I was so tired and drunk I started to laugh. 'Come on, Francis,’ 
I said. 'Give me a break.' 
‘It's fun,’ he said. 'I promise you.' 


Matters progressed. My jaded nerves began to stir. His eyes were magnified 
and wicked behind his pince-nez. Presently he took them off and dropped 
them on my bureau with an absent clatter. 


Then, quite unexpectedly, there was another knock at the door. We sprang 
apart. His eyes were wide. We stared at each other, and then the knock came 
again. 


Francis swore under his breath, bit his lip. I, panic-stricken, gi) “=«re« t 


‘But what if it's —?' I whispered. —* 


I had been about to say 'What if it's Henry?’ But what I was actually thinking 
was ‘What if it's the cops?’ Francis, I knew, was thinking the same thing. 


More knocking, more insistent this time. 


My heart was pounding. Bewildered with fear, I crossed to my bed and sat 
down. 


Francis ran a hand through his hair. ‘Come in,' he called. 


I was so upset that it took me a moment to realize it was only Charles. He 
was leaning with one elbow against the door frame, his red scarf slung into 
great careless loops around his neck. When he stepped in my room I saw 
immediately that he was drunk. 'Hi,' he said to Francis. 'What the hell are you 
doing here?’ 


"You scared us to death. 
'I wish I'd known you were coming. Henry called and got me out of bed.’ 


The two of us looked at him, waiting for him to explain. He jostled off his 
coat and turned to me with a watery, intense gaze. 


"You were in my dream,’ he said. 
"What?' 


He blinked at me. 'I just remembered,’ he said. 'I had a dream tonight. You 
were in it.’ 


I stared at him. Before I had a chance to tell him he was in my dream, too, 
Francis said impatiently: ‘Come on, Charles. What's the matter?’ 


Charles ran a hand through his windblown hair. ‘Nothing,’ he said. He 
reached into his coat pocket and pulled out a sheaf of papers folded 
lengthwise. 'Did you do your Greek for today?’ he asked me. 


I rolled my eyes. Greek had been about the last thing on my mind. 


: Hemy thought you might have forgot. He called and asked me to bring 
mine for you to copy, just in case. 


He was very drunk. He wasn't slurring his words, but he smelled of whiskey 
and he was extremely unsteady on his feet. 


His face was flushed and radiant as an angel's. 
"You talked to Henry? Has he heard anything?’ 


"He's very annoyed about this weather. Nothing's turned up that he knows of. 
Gosh, it's hot in here,' he said, shouldering off his jacket. 


Francis, sitting in his chair by the window with an ankle balanced upon the 
opposite kneecap and his teacup balanced on his bare ankle, was looking at 
Charles rather narrowly. 


Charles turned, reeling slightly. "What are you looking at?' he said. 
"Do you have a bottle in your pocket?’ 
'No.' 


‘Nonsense, Charles, I can hear it sloshing. 


"What difference does it make?’ 
'T want a drink.’ 


‘Oh, all right,’ said Charles, irritated. He reached into the inside pocket of the 
jacket and brought out a flat pint bottle. 


‘Here,’ he said. ‘Don't be a pig.’ 
Francis drank the rest of his tea and reached for the bottle. 


Thanks,’ he said, pouring the remaining inch or so into his teacup. I looked at 
him — dark suit, sitting very straight with his legs now crossed at the knee. He 
was the picture of respectability except that his feet were bare. All of a sudden 
I found myself able to see him as the world saw him, as I myself had seen him 
when I first met him — cool, well-mannered, rich, absolutely beyond reproach. 
It was such a convincing illusion that even I, who knew the essential falseness 
of it, felt oddly comforted. 


He drank the whiskey down in a swallow. 'We need to sober you up, 
Charles,’ he said. 'We've got class in a couple of hours.’ 


Charles sighed and sat on the foot of my bed. He looked very 32.7 3I — —astii 
HOE in dark circles, or pauui, BMI a dreamy and bright-cheeked sadness. 'I 
know,’ he said. 'I hoped the walk might do the trick.’ 


"You need some coffee.’ ™ He wiped his damp forehead with the heel of his 
hand. 'I need | more than coffee,’ he said. 


I smoothed out the papers and went over to my desk and began to copy out 
my Greek. 


Francis sat down on the bed next to Charles. ‘Where's Camilla?’ 
‘Asleep.’ 

"What'd you two do tonight? Get drunk?’ 

'No,' said Charles tersely. 'Cleaned house.’ 

"No. Really.’ 

Tm not kidding.’ 


I was still so dopey that I couldn't make any sense of the passage I was 
copying, only a sentence here and there. Being weary from the march, the 
soldiers stopped to offer sacrifices at the temple. I came back from that 


country and said that I had seen the Gorgon, but it did not make me a stone. 
‘Our house is full of tulips, if you want any,’ said Charles inexplicably. 
"What do you mean?’ 


'I mean, before the snow got too deep, we went outside and brought them in. 
Everything's full of them. The water glasses, even. 


Tulips, I thought, staring at the jumble of letters before me. 


Had the ancient Greeks known them under a different name, if they'd had 
tulips at all? The letter psi, in Greek, is shaped like a tulip. All of a sudden, in 
the dense alphabet forest of the page, little black tulips began to pop up in a 
quick, random pattern like falling raindrops. 


My vision swam. I closed my eyes. I sat there for a long time, half-dozing, 
until I became aware that Charles was saying my name. 


I turned in my chair. They were leaving. Francis was sirring on the side of 
my bed, lacing his shoes. 


"Where are you going?’ I said. 
"Home to dress. It's getting late.’ 


I didn't want to be alone — quite the contrary — but I felt, unaccountably, a 
strong desire to be rid of them both. The sun was up. Francis reached over and 
turned off the lamp. The morning light was sober and pale and made my room 
seem horribly quiet. 


"We'll see you in a little while,’ he said, and then I heard their footsteps dying 
on the stair. Everything was faded and silent in the dawn — dirty teacups, 
unmade bed, snowflakes floating past the window with an airy, dangerous 
calm. My ears rang. When I turned back to my work, with trembling, ink- 
stained hands, the scratch of my pen on the paper rasped loud in the stillness. I 
thought of Bunny's dark room and of the ravine, miles away; of all those 
layers of silence on silence. 


‘And where is Edmund this morning?’ said Julian as we opened our 
grammars. 


‘At home, I suppose,’ said Henry. He'd come in late and we hadn't had a 
chance to talk. He seemed calm, well rested, more than he had any right to be. 


The others were surprisingly calm as well. Even Francis and Charles were 
well dressed, freshly shaven, very much their unconcerned old selves. Camilla 


sat between them, with her elbow propped negligently on the table and her 
chin in her hand, tranquil as an orchid. 


Julian arched an eyebrow at Henry. 'Is he ill?’ 
'I don't know.’ 


‘This weather may have slowed him a bit. Perhaps we should wait a few 
minutes. 


'I think that's a good idea,' said Henry, going back to his book. 


After class, once we were away from the Lyceum and near the birch grove, 
Henry glanced around to make sure that no one was within earshot; we all 
leaned close to hear what he was going to say but at just that moment, as we 
were standing in a huddle and our breath was coming out in clouds, I heard 
someone call my name and there, at a great distance, was Dr Roland, tottering 
through the snow like a lurching corpse. 


I disengaged myself and went to meet him. He was breathing hard and, with 
a good deal of coughing and hawing, he began to tell me about something he 
wanted me to have a look at in his office. 


There was nothing I could do but go with him, adjusting my pace to his 
leaden shuffle. Once inside, he paused several times on the stair to remark 
upon scraps of debris that the janitor had missed, feebly kicking at them with 
his foot. He kept me for half an hour. When I finally escaped, with my ears 
ringing and an armful of loose papers struggling to fly away in the wind, the 
birch grove was empty. 


I don't know what I'd expected, but the world certainly hadn't been kicked 
out of its orbit overnight. People were hurrying to and fro, on their way to 
class, everything business as usual. The sky was gray and an icy wind was 
blowing off Mount Cataract. 


I bought a milk shake at the snack bar and then went home. I was walking 
down the hall to my suite when I ran headlong into Judy Poovey. 


She glared at me. She looked like she had an evil hangover and there were 
black circles under her eyes. 


‘Oh, hello,’ I said, edging past. 'Sorry.' 
‘Hey,’ she said. 


I turned around. 


‘So you went home with Mona Beale last night?’ 

For a second I didn't know what she meant. 'What?' 

"How was it?’ she said bitchily. 'Was she good?’ 

Taken aback, I shrugged and started down the hall. 

To my annoyance she followed and caught me by the arm. 

‘She's got a boyfriend, do you know that? You better hope nobody tells him. 
'I don't care. 


"Last term he beat up Bram Guernsey because he thought Bram was hitting 
on her.’ 


‘She was the one who was hitting on me. 
She gave me a catty, sideways look. 'Well, I mean, she's kind of a slut.' 
Just before I woke up, I had a terrible dream. 


I was in a large, old-fashioned bathroom, like something from a Zsa Zsa 
Gabor movie, with gold fixtures and mirrors and pink tiles on the walls and 
floor. A bowl of goldfish stood on a spindly pedestal in the corner. I went over 
to look at them, my footsteps echoing on the tile, and then I became aware of 
a measured plink plink plink, coming from the faucet of the tub. 


The tub was pink, too, and it was full of water, and Bunny, fully clad, was 
lying motionless at the bottom of it. His eyes were open and his glasses were 
askew and his pupils were different sizes — one large and black, the other 
scarcely a pinpoint. The water was clear, and very still. The tip of his necktie 
undulated near the surface. 


Plink, plink, plink. I couldn't move. Then, suddenly, I heard footsteps 
approaching, and voices. With a rush of terror I realized I had to hide the body 
somehow, where I didn't know; I plunged my hands into the icy water and 
grasped him beneath the arms and tried to pull him out, but it was no good, no 
good; his head lolled back uselessly and his open mouth was filling with 
water... 


Struggling against his weight, reeling backward, I knocked the fishbowl from 
its pedestal and it crashed to the floor. Goldfish flopping all around my feet, 
amidst the shards of broken glass. 


Someone banged on the door. In my terror I let go of the body 33i I and it 


fell back into the tub with a hideous slap and a spray of water and I woke up. 


It was almost dark. There was a horrible, erratic thumping in my chest, as if 
a large bird were trapped inside my ribcage and beating itself to death. 
Gasping, I lay back on my bed. 


When the worst of it was over I sat up. I was trembling all over and drenched 
in sweat. Long shadows, nightmare light. I could see some kids playing 
outside in the snow, silhouetted in black against the dreadful, salmon-colored 
sky. Their shouts and laughter had, at that distance, an insane quality. I dug 
the heels of my hands hard into my eyes. Milky spots, pinpoints of light. Oh, 
God, I thought. 


Bare cheek on cold tile. The roar and rush of the toilet was so $ loud I 
thought it would swallow me. It was like all the times I'd ever been sick, all 
the drunken throw-ups I'd ever had in the bathrooms of gas stations and bars. 
Same old bird's-eye view: those odd little knobs at the base of the toilet that 
you never notice at any other time; sweating porcelain, the hum of pipes, that 
long burble of water as it spirals down. 


While I was washing my face, I began to cry. The tears mingled easily with 
the cold water, in the luminous, dripping crimson of my cupped fingers, and at 
first I wasn't aware that I was crying at all. The sobs were regular and 
emotionless, as mechanical as the dry heaves which had stopped only a 
moment earlier; there was no reason for them, they had nothing to do with me. 
I brought my head up and looked at my weeping reflection in the mirror with 
a kind of detached interest. What does this mean? I thought. I looked terrible. 
Nobody else was falling apart; yet here I was, shaking all over and seeing bats 
like Ray Milland in The Lost Weekend. 


A cold draft was blowing in the window. I felt shaky but oddly refreshed. I 
ran myself a hot bath, throwing in a good handful of Judy's bath salts, and 
when I got out and put on my clothes I felt quite myself again. 


Nihil sub sole novum, I thought as I walked back down the hail to my room. 
Any action, in the fullness of time, sinks to nothingness. 


They were all there when I arrived at the twins' for dinner that night, 
gathered around the radio and listening to the weather forecast as if to some 
wartime bulletin from the front. 'For the long-range outlook,’ said an 
announcer's spry voice, 'expect cool weather on Thursday, with cloudy skies 
and a possibility of showers, leading into warmer weather for the ' 


Henry snapped off the radio. 'If we're lucky,' he said, 'the snow will be gone 
tomorrow night. Where were you this afternoon, Richard?’ 


"At home.’ 


Tm glad you're here. I want you to do a little favor for me, if you don't 
mind. 


"What is it?’ 


'I want to drive you downtown after dinner so you can see those movies at 
the Orpheum and tell us what they're about. Do you mind?' 


'No.' 


'I know this is an imposition on a school night, but I really don't think it's 
wise for any of the rest of us to go back again. 


Charles has offered to copy out your Greek for you if you like.' 


‘If I do it on that yellow paper you use,’ said Charles, 'with your fountain pen, 
he'll never know the difference. 


'Thanks,' I said. Charles had a rather startling talent for forgery which, 
according to Camilla, dated from early childhood — expert report-card 
signatures by the fourth grade, entire excuse notes by the sixth. I was always 
getting him to sign Dr Roland's name to my time sheets. 


‘Really,’ said Henry, 'I hate to ask you to do this. I think they're dreadful 
movies.’ 


They were pretty bad. The first was a road movie from the early seventies, 
about a man who leaves his wife to drive cross-country. On the way he gets 
sidetracked into Canada and becomes involved with a bunch of draft dodgers; 
at the end he goes back to his wife and they renew their vows in a hippie 
ceremony. The worst thing was the soundtrack. All these acoustic guitar songs 
with the word ‘freedom’ in them. 


The second film was more recent. It was about the Vietnam War and was 
called Fields of Shame — a big-budget movie with a lot of stars. The special 
effects were a bit realistic for my taste, though. People getting their legs 
blown off and so forth. 


When I got out, Henry's car was parked down the street with the lights off. 
Upstairs at Charles and Camilla's, everyone was sitting around the kitchen 
table with their sleeves rolled up, deep in Greek. 


When we came in they began to stir, and Charles got up and made a pot of 
coffee while I read my notes. Both movies were rather plotless and I had a 


hard time communicating the gist of them. 


‘But these are terrible,’ said Francis. 'I'm embarrassed that people will think 
we went to see such bad movies.’ 


‘But wait,’ said Camilla. 


'I don't get it, either,’ Charles said. "Why did the sergeant bomb the village 
where the good people lived?’ 


"Yes,' Camilla said. "Why? And who was that kid with the puppy who just 
wandered up in the middle of it? How did he know Charlie Sheen?’ 


Charles had done a beautiful job on my Greek, and I was looking it over 
before class the next day when Julian came in. He paused in the doorway, 
looked at the empty chair and laughed. 'Goodness,' he said. "Not again." 


‘Looks like it,’ said Francis. 


'I must say, I hope our classes haven't become as tedious as all that. Please 
tell Edmund that, should he choose to attend tomorrow, I shall make an effort 
to be especially engaging. 


By noon it was apparent that the weather forecast was in error. 


The temperature had dropped ten degrees, and more snow fell in the 
afternoon. 


The five of us were to go out to dinner that night, and when the twins and I 
showed up at Henry's apartment, we found him looking especially glum. 
‘Guess who just phoned me,' he said. 


‘Who?’ 

"Marion.' 

Charles sat down. 'What did she want?’ 
‘She wanted to know if I'd seen Bunny.’ 
"What'd you say?’ 


"Well, of course I said I hadn't,’ Henry said irritably. "They were supposed to 
meet on Sunday night and she hasn't seen him since Saturday.’ 


Is she worried?’ 


‘Not particularly.’ 
Then what's the problem?’ 
‘Nothing.’ He sighed. 'I just hope the weather breaks tomorrow. ' 


But it didn't. Wednesday dawned bright and cold and two more inches of 
snow had accumulated in the night. 


‘Of course,’ said Julian, 'I don't mind if Edmund misses a class now and then. 
But three in a row. And you know what a hard time he has catching up.' 


"We can't go on like this much longer,’ said Henry at the twins’ apartment 
that night, as we were smoking cigarettes over uneaten plates of bacon and 


eggs. 
"What can we do?’ 


'I don't know. Except he's been missing now for seventy-two hours, and it'll 
start to look funny if we don't act worried pretty soon.' 


'No one else is worried,’ said Charles. 5 'No one else sees as much of him as 
we do. I wonder if Marion's home,’ he said, glancing at the clock. 


"Why? 
"Because maybe I should give her a call.’ 
‘For God's sake,' said Francis. 'Don't drag her into it.’ 


'I have no intention of dragging her into anything. I just want to make it plain 
to her that none of us have seen Bunny for three days.’ 


‘And what do you expect her to do about it?’ 
'I hope she'll call the police.’ 
"Have you lost your mind?’ 


"Well, if she doesn't, we're going to have to,' said Henry impatiently. The 
longer he's gone, the worse it will look. I don't want a big ruckus, people 
asking questions.’ 


Then why call the police?’ 


"Because if we go to them soon enough, I doubt there'll be any ruckus at all. 
Perhaps they'll send one or two people out here to poke around, thinking it's 


probably a false alarm ' 


Tf no one's found him yet,' I said, 'I don't see what makes you think that a 
couple of traffic cops from Hampden will do any better.’ 


"No one's found him because no one's looking. He's not half a mile away.' 


It took whoever answered a long time to bring Marion to the telephone. 
Henry stood patiently, gazing down at the floor; gradually his eyes began to 
wander, and after about five minutes he made an exasperated noise and looked 
up. 'My goodness, he said. 'What's taking them so long? Let me have a 
cigarette, would you, Francis?’ 


He had it in his mouth and Francis was lighting it for him when Marion 
came on the line. 'Oh, hello, Marion,’ he said, exhaling a cloud of smoke and 
turning his back to us. 'I'm glad I caught you. Is Bunny there?’ 


A slight pause. ‘Well,’ said Henry, reaching for the ashtray, 'do you know 
where he is, then?’ 


"Well, frankly,’ he said at last, 'I was going to ask you the same thing. He 
hasn't been in class for two or three days.’ 


Another long silence. Henry listened, his face pleasantly blank. 
Then, all of a sudden, his eyes widened. 'What?' he said, a little too sharply. 


All of us were jarred awake. Henry wasn't looking at any of us but at the 
wall above our heads, his blue eyes round and glassy. 


'I see,’ he said finally. 
More talk on the other end. 


"Well, if he happens to stop by, I'd appreciate it if you would ask him to call 
me. Let me give you my number.’ 


When he hung up he had a strange look on his face. We all stared at him. 
Henry?’ said Camilla. "What is it?’ 


‘She's angry. Not worried a bit. Expecting him to walk in the door any 
moment. I don't know,’ he said, staring at the floor. 


"This is very peculiar, but she said that a friend of hers — a girl named Rika 
Thalheim — saw Bunny standing around outside the First Vermont Bank this 
afternoon. 


We were too stunned to say anything. Francis laughed, a short, incredulous 
laugh. 


"My God, said Charles. "That's impossible. 
‘It certainly is,’ Henry said dryly. 
"Why would somebody just make that up?’ 


'I can't imagine. People think they see all kinds of things, I suppose. Well, of 
course, she didn't see him,' he added testily to Charles, who looked rather 
troubled. 'But I don't know what we should do now.' 


"What do you mean?’ 


"Well, we can't very well call and report him missing when somebody saw 
him six hours ago.’ 


‘So what are we going to do? Wait?’ 
"No, said Henry, biting his lower lip .111 have to think of something else.’ 
"Where on earth is Edmund?’ said Julian on Thursday morning. 


'I don't know how long he plans on being absent, but it is very thoughtless of 
him not to have got in touch with me.' 


No one answered him. He looked up from his book, amused at our silence. 
"What's wrong?’ he said teasingly. 'All these shameful faces. 


Perhaps,’ he said more coolly, ‘some of you are ashamed at how 
insufficiently you were prepared for yesterday's lesson.’ 


I saw Charles and Camilla exchange a look. For some reason, this week of 
all weeks, Julian had loaded us down with work. 


We'd all managed, somehow or other, to bring in the written assignments; 
but no one had kept up with the reading, and in class the day before there had 
been several excruciating silences which not even Henry had been able to 
break. 


Julian glanced down at his book. 'Perhaps, before we begin,’ he said, 'one of 
you should go call Edmund on the telephone and ask him to join us if he's at 
all able. I don't mind if he hasn't read his lesson, but this is an important class 
and he ought not to miss it.' 


Henry stood up. But then Camilla said, quite unexpectedly, 'I don't think he's 
at home.’ 


Then where is he? Out of town?’ 
I'm not sure.’ 


Julian lowered his reading glasses and looked at her over the tops of them. 
"What do you mean?’ 


"We haven't seen him for a couple of days.’ 


Julian's eyes widened with childish, theatrical surprise; not for the first time, 
I thought how much he was like Henry, that same strange mixture of chill and 
warmth. ‘Indeed,’ he said. 'Most peculiar. And you have no idea where he 
might be?’ 


The mischievous, open-ended note in his voice made me nervous .1 stared at 
the aqueous, rippling circles of light that the crystal vase cast over the 
tabletop. 


'No,' said Henry. "We're a bit puzzled.’ 

'I should think so.' His eyes met Henry's, for a long, strange moment. 
He knows, | thought, with a rush of panic. He knows we're lying. 
He just doesn't know what we're lying about. 


After lunch, after my French class, I sat on the top floor of the library with 
my books spread across the table in front of me. It was a strange, bright, 
dreamlike day. The snowy lawn — peppered with the toylike figures of distant 
people — was as smooth as sugar frosting on a birthday cake; a tiny dog ran, 
barking, after a ball; real smoke threaded from the dollhouse chimneys. 


This time, I thought, a year ago. What had I been doing? Driving a friend's 
car up to San Francisco, standing around in the poetry sections of bookstores 
worrying about my application to Hamp den. And now here I was, sitting in a 
cold room in strange clothes and wondering if I might go to prison. 


Nihil sub sole novum. A pencil sharpener complained loudly somewhere. I 
put my head down on my books — whispers, quiet footsteps, the smell of old 
paper in my nostrils. Several weeks earlier, Henry had become angry when 
the twins were voicing moral objections at the idea of killing Bunny. 'Don't be 
ridiculous,’ he snapped. 


"But how,' said Charles, who was close to tears, ‘how can you possibly justify 


cold-blooded murder?’ 


Henry lit a cigarette. 'I prefer to think of it,’ he had said, 'as redistribution of 
matter.’ 


I woke, with a start, to find Henry and Francis standing over me. 
"What is it?’ I said, rubbing my eyes and looking up at them. 
‘Nothing,’ said Henry. "Will you come with us to the car?’ 


Sleepily 1 followed them downstairs, where the car was parked in front of 
the bookstore. 


"What's the matter?’ I said after we had got in. 
"Do you know where Camilla is?’ 

‘Isn't she at home?’ 

'No. Julian hasn't seen her, either.’ 

"What do you want with her?’ 


Henry sighed. It was cold inside the car, and his breath came out white. 
‘Something's up,' he said. 'Francis and I saw Marion at the guard booth with 
Cloke Rayburn. They were talking to some people from Security.’ 


"When? 
‘About an hour ago.’ 
"You don't think they've done anything, do you?’ 


"We shouldn't jump to conclusions,’ said Henry. He was looking out at the 
roof of the bookstore, which was sheeted in ice and glittered in the sun. 'What 
we want is for Camilla to drop in on Cloke and see if she can find out what's 
going on. I'd go myself, except I hardly know him.' 


‘And he hates me,’ said Francis. 
T know him a little.’ 


"Not well enough. He and Charles are on fairly good terms, but we can't find 
him, either. 


I unwrapped a Rolaids tablet from a roll in my pocket and began to chew on 


it. 
"What's that you're eating?’ said Francis. 
'Rolaids.' 


Till have one of those, if you don't mind,’ Henry said. 'I guess we should 
drive by the house again. 


This time Camilla came to the door, opening it only a crack and looking out 
warily. Henry started to say something, but she gave him a sharp warning 
glance. 'Hello,' she said. 'Come in.’ 


We followed her inside without a word, down the dark hail into the living 
room. There, with Charles, was Cloke Rayburn. 


Charles stood up nervously; Cloke stayed where he was and looked at us 
with sleepy, inscrutable eyes. He had a sunburn and he needed a shave. 
Charles raised his eyebrows at us and mouthed the word 'stoned.' 


‘Hello,’ said Henry after a pause. 'How are you?’ 


Cloke coughed — a deep, nasty-sounding rasp — and shook a Marlboro from a 
pack on the table before him. 'Not bad,' he said. 


"You?' 
‘Fine.’ 


He stuck the cigarette in the corner of his mouth, lit it, coughed again. 'Hey,' 
he said to me. 'How's it going?’ 


‘Pretty good. 

"You were at that party at Durbinstall on Sunday.’ 
"Yes. 

‘Seen Mona”' he said without any inflection whatever. 


'No,' I said brusquely, and was suddenly aware that everyone was looking at 
me. 


'Mona?' said Charles, after a puzzled silence. 


‘This girl,’ Cloke said. ‘Sophomore. Lives in Bunny's house.’ 


‘Speaking of whom,’ said Henry. 


Cloke leaned back in his chair and fixed Henry with a bloodshot, heavy- 
lidded gaze. "Yeah,' he said. 'We were just talking about Bun. You haven't 
seen him the last couple days, have you?’ 


"No. Have you?’ 


Cloke didn't say anything for a moment. Then he shook his head. 'No,' he 
said hoarsely, reaching for an ashtray. 'I can't figure out where the hell he is. 
Last time I saw him was Saturday night, not that I thought about it or anything 
until today.’ 


'I talked to Marion last night,’ Henry said. 


T know,’ said Cloke. 'She's kind of worried. I saw her in Commons this 
morning and she told me he hasn't been in his room for like five days. She 
thought maybe he was at home or something, but she called his brother 
Patrick. Who says he ain't in Connecticut. And she talked to Hugh, too, and he 
says he's not in New York, either.’ 


‘Did she speak to his parents?’ 

"Well, shit, she wasn't trying to get him in trouble.’ 

Henry was silent for a moment. Then he said: "Where do you think he is?' 
Cloke looked away, shrugged uneasily. 


"You've known him longer than I have. He's got a brother at Yale, doesn't 
he?' 


"Yeah. Brady. Business school. But Patrick said he'd just talked to Brady, 
you know?’ 


‘Patrick lives at home, right?’ 


"Yeah. He's got some kind of business thing he's working on, a sporting 
goods store or something, trying to get it off the ground.’ 


‘And Hugh's the lawyer.’ 
"Yes. He's the oldest. He's at Milbank Tweed in New York.’ 
"What about the other brother — the married one?’ 


"Hugh's the married one.' 


‘But isn't there another one who's married, too?’ 

‘Oh. Teddy. I know he's not there.’ 

"Why? 

'The T-man lives with his in-laws. I don't think they get along too well.' 
There was a long silence. 

‘Can you think of anyplace he might be?’ said Henry. 


Cloke leaned forward, his long, dark hair falling in his face, and knocked the 
ash offhis cigarette. He had a troubled, secretive expression, and after a few 
moments he looked up. 'Have you noticed,’ he said, 'that Bunny's had an awful 
lot of cash around the last two or three weeks?’ 


"What do you mean?’ said Henry, a trifle sharply. 


"You know Bunny. He's broke all the time. Lately, though, he's had all this 
money. Like, a lot. Maybe his grandmother sent it to him or something, but 
you can be damn sure he didn't get it from his parents." 


There was another long silence. Henry bit his lip. 'What are you trying to get 
at?' he said. 


"You have noticed it, then.’ 
"Now that you mention it, I have.' 


Cloke shifted uncomfortably in his chair. 'This is off the record, now,’ he 
said. 


With a sinking feeling in my chest, I sat down. 

"What is it?’ Henry said. 

'I don't know if I should even mention it.' 

‘If you think it important, by all means do,' Henry said curtly. 


Cloke took a last draw on his cigarette and ground it out with a deliberate, 
corkscrewing movement. 'You know,’ he said, 'that I deal a little coke now 
and then, don't you? Not much,’ he said hastily, just a few grams here and 
there. Just for me and my friends. But it's easy work and I can make a little 
money at it, too.' 


We all looked at each other. This was no news at all. Cloke was one of the 
biggest drug dealers on campus. 


'So?' said Henry. 


Cloke looked surprised. Then he shrugged. 'So,' he said, 'I know this 
Chinaman down on Mott Street in New York, kind of a scary guy, but he likes 
me and he'll pretty much give me however much I can scrape up the cash for. 
Blow, mostly, sometimes a little pot as well but that's kind of a headache. I've 
known him for years. We even did a little business when Bunny and I were at 
Saint Jerome's.' He paused. 'Well. You know how broke Bunny always is.’ 


"Yes. 
"Well, he's always been real interested in the whole thing. 


Quick money, you know. If he'd ever had the cash I might've cut him in on it 
— on the financial end, I mean — but he never did and besides, Bunny has no 
business being mixed up in a deal like this.’ He lit another cigarette. 'Anyway,' 
he said. That's why I'm worried.’ 


Henry frowned. 'I'm afraid I don't follow.’ 


"This was a bad mistake I guess but I let him ride down with me a couple 
weeks ago.' 


We had already heard about this excursion to New York. 
Bunny had bragged about it incessantly. 'And?' said Henry. 


'I don't know. I'm just kind of worried, is all. He knows where the guy lives — 
right? — and he's got all this money, so when I was talking to Marion, I just ' 


"You don't think he went down there by himself?’ said Charles. 
'I don't know. I sure hope not. He never actually met the guy or anything.’ 
"Would Bunny do something like that?’ said Camilla. 


‘Frankly,’ said Henry, unhooking his glasses and giving them a quick swipe 
with his handkerchief, 'it strikes me as just the type of stupid thing that Bunny 
would do.’ 


Nobody said anything for a moment. Henry glanced up. His eyes without the 
glasses were blind, unwavering, strange. 'Does Marion know about this?’ he 
said. 


'No,' said Cloke. 'And I'd just as soon you didn't tell her, okay?’ 
‘Do you have any other reason for thinking this?’ 


"No. Except where else could he be? And Marion told you about Rika 
Thalheim seeing him at the bank on Wednesday?’ 


"Yes. 
‘That's kind of weird but not really, not if you think about it. 


Say he went down to New York with a couple hundred dollars, right? And 
talking like he had a lot more where that came from. 


These guys'll chop you up and put you in a garbage bag for twenty bucks. I 
mean, I don't know. Maybe they told him to go back home and close out his 
account and come back with all he had.' 


‘Bunny Joesn t even have a bank account.’ 
"That you know of,' Cloke pointed out. 
"You're perfectly right,’ said Henry. 

‘Can't you just call down there?’ Charles said. 


"Who'm I gonna call? The guy's unlisted and he doesn't hand out business 
cards, all right?’ 


Then how do you get in touch with him?' 
'I have to call a third guy.’ 


"Then call him,’ said Henry calmly, putting the handkerchief back in his 
pocket and hooking the glasses back over his ears. 


"They're not going to tell me anything.’ 
'I thought they were such good chums of yours.’ 


"What do you think?’ said Cloke. "You think these people are running some 
kind of a scout troop down there? Are you kidding? 


These are real guys. Doing real shit.’ 


For one horrible instant I thought that Francis was going to laugh aloud but 
somehow he managed to turn it into a theatrical battery of coughs, hiding his 


face behind his hand. With barely a glance Henry slapped him, hard, on the 
back. 


Then what do you suggest we do?’ Camilla said. 


'I don't know. I'd like to get into his room, see if he took a suitcase or 
anything.’ 


Isn't it locked?’ Henry said. 
"Yes. Marion tried to get Security to open it for her and they wouldn't do it.' 


Henry bit his lower lip. 'Well,’ he said slowly, ‘it wouldn't be so very hard to 
get in in spite of that, would it?’ 


Cloke put out his cigarette and looked at Henry with new interest. 'No,' he 
said. ‘It wouldn't.’ 


There's the ground floor window. The storm windows have been taken off.’ 
'I know I could handle the screens.’ 

The two of them stared at each other. 

"Maybe,' Cloke said, 'I should go down and try it now.’ 

"We'll go with you.’ 

"Man,' said Cloke, 'we can't all go.' 


I saw Henry cut his eyes at Charles; Charles, behind Cloke's back, 
acknowledged the glance. 'T'll go,' he said suddenly, in a voice that was too 
loud, and tossed off the rest of his drink. 


‘Cloke, how on earth did you get mixed up in something like this?' Camilla 
said. 


He laughed condescendingly. ‘It's nothing,’ he said. 'You have to meet these 
guys on their own ground. I don't let them give me shit or anything.’ 


Inconspicuously, Henry slipped behind Cloke's chair to where Charles stood, 
and leaned over and whispered something in his ear. I saw Charles nod 
tersely. 


"Not that they don't try to fuck with you,' said Cloke. 'But I know how they 
think. Now Bunny, he doesn't have a clue, he thinks it's some kind of a game 
with hundred-dollar bills just lying on the ground, waiting for some stupid kid 


to come along and pick them up...' 


By the time he stopped talking, Charles and Henry had completed whatever 
business they'd been discussing and Charles had gone to the closet for his 
overcoat. Cloke reached for his sunglasses and stood up. He had a faint, dry 
smell of herbs, an echo of the pothead smell that always lingered in the dusty 
corridors of Durbinstall: patchouli oil, clove cigarettes, incense. 


Charles wound the scarf around his neck. His expression was at once casual 
and turbulent; his eyes were distant and his mouth was steady, but his nostrils 
flared slightly with his breathing. 


‘Be careful,’ Camilla said. 
She was talking to Charles, but Cloke turned and smiled. 
‘Piece of cake,'he said. 


She walked with them to the door. As soon as she shut it behind them she 
turned around. 


Henry put a finger to his lips. 


We listened to their footsteps going down the stairs, and were quiet until we 
heard Cloke's car start. Henry went to the window and pulled aside a shabby 
lace curtain. 'They're gone,’ he said. 


"Henry, are you sure this is a good idea?’ said Camilla. 


He shrugged, still looking at the street below. 'I don't know,’ he said. 'I had to 
play that one by ear. 


'I wish you'd gone. Why didn't you go with him?’ 
'I would have, but this is better.’ 
"What did you say to him?’ 


"Well, it should be pretty obvious even to Cloke that Bunny isn't out of town. 
Everything he owns is in that room. Money, extra glasses, winter coat. Odds 
are that Cloke will want to leave, and not say anything, but I told Charles to 
insist that they at least call Marion over for a look. If she sees — well. She 
doesn't know a thing about Cloke's problems and wouldn't care if she did. 


Unless I'm mistaken she'll call the police, or Bunny's parents at the very 
least, and I doubt Cloke will be able to stop her.’ 


"They won't find him today,’ said Francis. ‘It'll be dark in a couple of hours.’ 
"Yes, but if we're lucky they'll start looking first thing tomorrow.’ 
"Do you think anyone will want to talk to us about it?’ 


'I don't know,' said Henry abstractedly. 'I don't know how they go about such 
things.’ 


A thin ray of sun struck the prisms of a candelabrum on the mantelpiece, 
throwing brilliant, trembling shards of light that were distorted by the slant of 
the dormer walls. All of a sudden, images from every crime movie I'd ever 
seen began to pop into my mind — the windowless room, the harsh lights and 
narrow hallways, images which did not seem so much theatrical or foreign as 
imbued with the indelible quality of memory, of experience lived. Don't think, 
don't think, I told myself, looking fixedly at a bright, cold pool of sunlight 
soaking into the rug near my feet. 


Camilla tried to light a cigarette, but one match and then another went out. 
Henry took the hox from her and struck one himself; it flared up high and 
strong and she leaned close to it, one hand cupped around the flame and the 
other resting upon his wrist. 


The minutes crept by with a torturous slowness. Camilla brought a bottle of 
whiskey into the kitchen and we sat around the table playing euchre, Francis 
and Henry against Camilla and me. 


Camilla played well — this was her game, her favorite — but I wasn't a good 
partner and we lost trick after trick to the others. 


The apartment was very still: clink of glasses, ruffle of cards. 


Henry's sleeves were rolled above his elbows and the sun glinted metallic off 
Francis's pince-nez .1 did my best to concentrate on the game but again and 
again I found myself staring, through the open door, at the clock on the mantel 
in the next room. It was one of those bizarre pieces of Victorian bric-a-brac 
that the twins were so fond of- a white china elephant with the clock balanced 
in a howdah, and a little black mahout in gilt turban and breeches to strike the 
hours. There was something diabolical about the mahout, and every time I 
looked up I found him grinning at me in an attitude of cheerful malice. 


I lost count of the score, lost count of the games. The room grew dim. 
Henry laid down his cards. 'March,' he said. 


Tm sick of this,' said Francis. Where is he?’ 


The clock ticked loudly, a jangling, arrhythmic tick. We sat in the fading 
light, the cards forgotten. Camilla took an apple from a bowl on the counter 
and sat in the windowsill, eating it morosely and looking down at the street 
below. A fiery outline of twilight shone around her silhouette, burned red-gold 
in her hair, grew diffuse in the fuzzy texture of the woolen skirt pulled 
carelessly about her knees. 


"Maybe something went wrong,’ Francis said. 
‘Don't be ridiculous. What could go wrong?’ 
'A million things. Maybe Charles lost his head or something.’ 


Henry gave him a fishy look. 'Calm down,’ he said. 'I don't know where you 
get all these Dostoyevsky sorts of ideas." 


Francis was about to reply when Camilla jumped up. 'He's coming,’ she said. 
Henry stood up. "Where? Is he alone?’ 
"Yes,' said Camilla, running to the door. 


She ran down to meet him on the landing and in a few moments the two of 
them were back. 


Charles's eyes were wild and his hair was disordered. He took off his coat, 
threw it on a chair, flung himself on the couch. 


‘Somebody make me a drink,’ he said. 
Is everything all right?’ 

"Yes. 

"What happened?’ 

"Where's that drink?’ 


Impatiently, Henry splashed some whiskey in a dirty glass and shoved it at 
him. 'Did it go well? Did the police come?’ 


Charles took a long swallow, winced and nodded. 
"Where's Cloke? At home?’ 


'I guess.’ 


Tell us everything from the first.' 


Charles finished the glass and set it down. His face was a damp, feverish red. 
"You were right about that room,’ he said. 


"What do you mean?’ 


It was eerie. Terrible. Bed unmade, dust everywhere, half an old Twinkie 
lying on his desk and ants crawling all over it. Cloke got scared and wanted to 
leave, but I called Marion before he could. She was there in a few minutes. 
Looked around, seemed kind of stunned, didn't say much. Cloke was very 
agitated.’ 


‘Did he tell her about the drug business?’ 


"No. He hinted at it, more than once, but she wasn't paying much attention to 
him.' He looked up. "You know, Henry,' he said abruptly, 'I think we made a 
bad mistake by not going down there first. We should've gone through that 
room ourselves before either of them even saw it.' 


"Why do you say that?’ 
"Look what I found.' He pulled a piece of paper from his pocket. 
Henry took it from him quickly and looked it over. 'How did you get this?’ 


He shrugged. 'Luck. It was on top of his desk. I slipped it off the first chance 
I had. 


I looked over Henry's shoulder. It was a Xerox of a page of the Hampden 
Examiner. Wedged between a column by the Home Extension Service and a 
chopped-off ad for garden hoes, there was a small but conspicuous headline. 


MYSTERIOUS DEATH IN BATTENKILL COUNTY 


Battenkill County Sheriff Department, along with Hampden police, are still 
investigating the brutal November 12 homicide of Harry Ray Mc Ree. The 
mutilated corpse of Mr Mc Ree, a poultry farmer and former member of the 
Egg Producers Association of Vermont, was found upon his Mechanicsville 
farm. Robbery did not appear to be a motive, and though Mr Mc Ree was 
known to have several enemies, both in the chicken-and-egg business and in 
Battenkill county at large, none of these are suspects in the slaying. 


Horrified, I leaned closer — the word mutilated had electrified me, it was the 
only thing I could see on the page — but Henry had turned the paper over and 
begun to study the other side. "Well,' he said, ‘at least this isn't a photocopy of 


a clipping. Odds are he did this at the library, from the school's copy. 
'I hope you're right but that doesn't mean it's the only copy.’ 
I Icnry put the paper in the ashtray and struck the match. 


When he touched it to the edge a bright red seam crawled up the side, then 
licked suddenly over the whole thing; the words were illumined for a moment 
before they curled and darkened. 


Well,’ he said, ‘it's too late now. At least you got this one. What happened 
next?! 


"Well, Marion left. She went next door to Putnam House and came back with 
a friend.’ 


"Who?' 


'I don't know her. Uta or Ursula or something. One of those Swedish-looking 
girls who wears fishermen's sweaters all the time. Anyway, she had a look 
around, too, and Cloke was just sitting there on the bed smoking a cigarette 
and looking like his stomach hurt him, and finally she — this Uta or whatever 
suggested we go upstairs and tell Bunny's house chairperson. 


Francis started laughing. At Hampden, the house chairpeople were who you 
complained to if your storm windows didn't work or someone was playing 
their stereo too loud. 


"Well, it's a good thing she did or we might still be standing there,’ said 
Charles. 'It was that loud, red-haired girl who wears hiking boots all the time — 
what's her name? Briony Dillard?’ 


"Yes,' I said. Besides being a house chairperson and a vigorous member of 
the student council, she was also the president of a leftist group off campus, 
and was always trying to mobilize the youth of Hampden in the face of 
crushing indifference. 


"Well, she barged right in and got the show on the road,’ said Charles. Took 
our names. Asked a bunch of questions. Herded Bunny's neighbors into the 
hall and asked them questions. Called Student Services, then Security. 
Security said they would send somebody over' — he lit a cigarette — 'but it 
really wasn't their jurisdiction, a student disappearance, and that she should 
call the police. Will you get me another drink?’ he said, turning abruptly to 
Camilla. 


‘And they came?’ 


Charles, cigarette balanced between his first and middle fingers, wiped the 
sweat from his forehead with the heel of his hand. 'Yes,' he said. "Two of 
them. And a couple of security guards as well.’ 


"What did they do?’ 


The security guards didn't do anything. But the policemen were actually kind 
of efficient. One of them looked around the room while the other herded 
everybody in the hall and started asking questions. 


"What kind of questions?’ 


"Who'd seen him last and where, how long he'd been gone, where he might 
be. It all sounds pretty obvious but that was the first time anyone had even 
asked. 


‘Did Cloke say anything?’ 


"Not much. It was very confused, a lot of people around, most of them dying 
to tell what they knew, which was nothing. No one paid any attention to me at 
all. This lady who'd come down from Student Services kept trying to butt in, 
acting very officious and saying it wasn't a police matter, that the school 
would handle it. Finally one of the policemen got mad. «Look,» he said, 
«what's the matter with you people? This boy's been missing for a solid week 
and nobody's even mentioned it till now. This is serious business and if you 
want my two cents, I think the school may be at fault.» Well, that really got 
the lady from Student Services going and then, all of a sudden, the policeman 
in the room came out with Bunny's wallet. 


‘Everything got very quiet. There was two hundred dollars in it, and all of 
Bunny's ID. The policeman who'd found it said, «I think we'd better contact 
this boy's family.» Everyone started whispering. The lady from Student 
Services got very white and said she'd go up to her office and get Bunny's file 
immediately. 


The policeman went with her. 


‘By this time the hall was absolutely mobbed. They'd trickled in from 
outdoors and were hanging around to see what was going on. The first 
policeman told them to go home and mind their own business, and Cloke slid 
away in the confusion. Before he left, he pulled me aside and told me again 
not to mention that drug business.’ 


'I hope you waited until you were told you could leave.’ 


'I did. It wasn't much longer. The policeman wanted to talk to Marion, and he 


told me and this Uta we could go home once he'd taken our names and stuff. 
That was about an hour ago. 


"Then why are you just getting back?’ 


Tm coming to that. I didn't want to run into anybody on the way home, so I 
cut across the back of campus, down behind the faculty offices. That was a big 
mistake. I hadn't even got to the birch grove when that troublemaker from 
Student Services — the lady who started the fight - saw me from out the 
window of the Dean's office and called for me to come in. 


"What was she doing in the Dean's office?’ 


"Using the WATS line. They had Bunny's father on the telephone — he was 
yelling at everybody, threatening to sue. The Dean of Studies was trying to 
calm him down, but Mr Corcoran kept asking to talk to someone he knew. 
They'd tried to get you on another line, Henry, but you weren't home.’ 


'Had he asked to talk to me?’ 


‘Apparently. They were about to send someone up to the Lyceum for Julian, 
but then this lady saw me out the window. 


There were about a million people there — the policeman, the Dean's 
secretary, four or five people from down the hall, that nutty lady who works in 
Records. Next door, in the admissions office, somebody was trying to get hold 
of the President. There were some teachers hanging around, too. I guess the 
Dean of Studies was in the middle of a conference when the lady from 
Student Services came bursting in with the policeman. Your friend was there, 
Richard. Doctor Roland. 


"Anyway. The crowd parted when I came in and the Dean of Studies handed 
me the telephone. Mr Corcoran calmed down when he realized who I was. 
Got all confidential and asked me if this wasn't some type of frat stunt.’ 


‘Oh, God,' said Francis. 


Charles looked at him out of the corner of his eye. 'He asked about you. 
«Where's the old Carrot-Top,» he said.’ 


"What else did he say?’ 


"He was very nice. Asked about you all, really. Said to tell everybody that he 
said hi.’ 


There was a long, uncomfortable pause. 


Henry bit his lower lip and went to the liquor cabinet to pour himself a drink. 
‘Did anything,’ he said, 'come up about that bank business?’ 


"Yes. Marion gave them the girl's name. By the way' — when he looked up, 
his eyes were distracted, blank — 'I forgot to tell you earlier, but Marion gave 
your name to the police. Yours too, Francis. 


"Why?' said Francis, alarmed. "What for?’ 
"Who were his friends? They wanted to know.’ 
"But why me?’ 

‘Calm down, Francis.’ 


The light in the room was gone. The skies were lilac-colored and the snowy 
streets had a surreal, lunar glow. Henry turned on the lamp. 'Do you think 
they'll start looking tonight?’ 


They'll look for him, certainly. Whether they'll look in the right place is 
something else.’ 


No one said anything for a moment. Charles, thoughtfully, rattled the ice in 
his glass. 'You know,’ he said, 'we've done a terrible thing.’ 


"We had to, Charles, as we have all discussed.’ 


'I know, but I can't stop thinking about Mr Corcoran. The holidays we've 
spent at his house. And he was so sweet on the telephone.’ 


"We're all a lot better off.’ 
‘Some of us are, you mean.' 


Henry smiled acidly. 'Oh, I don't know,' he said. Tle XXuiou port; jif Yfrc hv 
'\E>r^ 


This was something to the effect that, in the Underworld, a great ox costs 
only a penny, but I knew what he meant and in spite of myself I laughed. 
There was a tradition among the ancients that things were very cheap in Hell. 


When Henry left, he offered to drive me back to school. It was late, and 
when we pulled up behind the dormitory I asked him if he wanted to come to 
Commons and have some dinner. 


We stopped in the post office so Henry could check his mail. 


He went to his mailbox only about every three weeks so there was quite a 
stack waiting for him; he stood by the trash can, going through it indifferently, 
throwing half the envelopes away unopened. Then he stopped. 


"What is it?’ 
He laughed. 'Look in your mailbox. It's a faculty questionnaire. 
Julian's up for review.’ 


They were closing the dining hall by the time we arrived, and the janitors 
had already started to mop the floor. The kitchen was closed, too, so I went to 
ask for some peanut butter and bread while Henry made himself a cup of tea. 
The main dining room was deserted. We sat at a table in the corner, our 
reflections mirrored in the black of the plate-glass windows. Henry took out a 
pen and began to fill out Julian's evaluation. 


I looked at my own copy while I ate my sandwich. The questions were 
ranked from one — poor to five — excellent: Is this faculty member prompt? 
Well-prepared? Ready to offer help outside the classroom? Henry, without the 
slightest pause, had gone down the list and circled all fives. Now I saw him 
writing the number 19 in a blank. 


"What's that for?’ 

"The number of classes I've taken with Julian,’ he said, without looking up. 
"You've taken nineteen classes with Julian?’ 

"Well, that's tutorials and everything,’ he said, irritated. 


For a moment there was no sound except the scratching of Henry's pen and 
the distant crash of dish racks in the kitchen. 


"Does everybody get these, or just us?' I said. 
‘Just us,’ 'I wonder why they even bother.’ 


‘For their records, I suppose.' He had turned to the last page, which was 
mostly blank. Please elaborate here on any additional compliments or 
criticisms you may have of this teacher. Extra sheets of paper may be attached 
if necessary. 


His pen hovered over the paper. Then he folded the sheet and pushed it 
aside. 


‘What,’ I said, ‘aren't you going to write anything?’ 


Henry took a sip of his tea. 'How,' he said, 'can I possibly make the Dean of 
Studies understand that there is a divinity in our midst?’ 


After dinner, I went back to my room. I dreaded the thought of the night 
ahead, but not for the reasons one might expect — that I was worried about the 
police, or that my conscience bothered me, or anything of the sort. Quite the 
contrary. By that time, by some purely subconscious means, I had developed a 
successful mental block about the murder and everything pertaining to it. I 
talked about it in select company but seldom thought of it when alone. 


What I did experience when alone was a sort of general neurotic horror, a 
common attack of nerves and self-loathing magnified to the power of ten. 
Every cruel or fatuous thing I'd ever said came back to me with an amplified 
clarity, no matter how I talked to myself or jerked my head to shake the 
thoughts away: old insults and guilts and embarrassments stretching clear 
back to childhood — the crippled boy I'd made fun of, the Easter chick I'd 
squeezed to death — paraded before me one by one, in vivid and mordant 
splendor. 


I tried to work on Greek but it wasn't much good. I would look up a word in 
the lexicon only to forget it when I turned to write it down; my noun cases, 
my verb forms, had left me utterly. 


Around midnight I went downstairs and called the twins. Camilla answered 
the phone. She was sleepy, a little drunk and getting ready for bed. 


"Tell me a funny story,’ I said. 

'I can't think of any funny stories.’ 

"Any story.’ 

‘Cinderella? The Three Bears?’ 

"Tell me something that happened to you when you were little.’ 


So she told me about the only time she remembered seeing her father, before 
he and her mother were killed. It was snowing, she said, and Charles was 
asleep, and she was standing in her crib looking out the window. Her father 
was out in the yard in an old gray sweater, throwing snowballs against the 
side of the fence. 


‘It must have been about the middle of the afternoon. I don't know what he 
was doing there. All I know is that I saw him, and I wanted to go out so bad, 
and I was trying to climb out of my crib and go to him. Then my grandmother 
came in and put the bars up so I couldn't get out, and I started to cry. My uncle 


Hilary — he was my grandmother's brother, he lived with us when we were 
little — came in the room and saw me crying. «Poor little girl,» he said. He 
rummaged around in his pockets, and finally he found a tape measure and 
gave it to me to play with.’ 


"A tape measure?’ 

"Yes. You know, the ones that snap in when you push a button. 

Charles and I used to fight over it all the time. It's still at home somewhere.’ 
Late the next morning I woke with an unpleasant start to a knock at my door. 


I opened it to find Camilla, who looked as if she'd dressed in a hurry. She 
came in and locked the door behind her while 1 stood blinking sleepily in my 
bathrobe. 'Have you been outside today?’ she said. 


A spider of anxiety crawled up the back of my neck. I sat down on the side 
of my bed. 'No,' I said. "Why?! 


'I don't know what's going on. The police are talking to Charles and Henry, 
and I don't even know where Francis is.’ 


"What?’ 


'A policeman came by and asked for Charles around seven this morning. He 
didn't say what he wanted. Charles got dressed and they went off together and 
then, at eight, I got a call from Henry. He asked if I'd mind if he was a little 
late this morning? 


And I asked what he was talking about, because we hadn't planned to meet. 
«Oh, thanks,» he said, «I knew you'd understand, the police are here about 
Bunny, you see, and they want to ask some questions." 


Tm sure it'll be all right.’ 


She ran a hand through her hair, in an exasperated gesture reminiscent of her 
brother. 'But it's not just that,’ she said. 


‘There are people all over the place. Reporters. Police. It's like a madhouse.' 
‘Are they looking for him?’ 


'I don't know what they're doing. They seem to be headed up towards Mount 
Cataract.' 


"Maybe we should leave campus for a while. 


Her pale, silvery glance skittered anxiously around my room. 
"Maybe,' she said. 'Get dressed and we'll decide what to do." 


I was in the bathroom scraping a quick razor over my face when Judy 
Poovey came in and rushed over so fast I cut my cheek. 


‘Richard,’ she said, her hand on my arm. 'Have you heard?’ 


I touched my face and looked at the blood on my fingertips, then glanced at 
her, annoyed. 'Heard what?’ 


‘About Bunny,’ she said, her voice hushed and her eyes wide. 
I stared at her, not knowing what she was going to say. 


‘Jack Teitelbaum told me. Cloke was talking to him about it last night. I 
never heard of anybody just, like, vanishing. It's too weird. And Jack was 
saying, well, if they haven't found him by now... I mean, I'm sure he's all 
right and everything,’ she said when she saw the way I was looking at her. 


I couldn't think of anything to say. 

‘If you want to stop by or anything, I'll be at home.’ 

‘Sure.’ 

'I mean, if you want to talk or something. I'm always there. 
Just stop by.' 

Thanks,’ I said, a little too abruptly. 


She looked up at me, her eyes large with compassion, with understanding of 
the solitude and incivility of grief. 'It'll be okay,’ she said, giving my arm a 
squeeze, and then she left, pausing in the door for a sorrowful backwards 
glance. 


Despite what Camilla had said, I was unprepared for the riot of activity 
outside. The parking lot was full and people from Hampden town were 
everywhere — factory workers mostly, from the looks of them, some with 
lunch boxes, others with children — beating the ground with sticks and making 
their way towards Mount Cataract in broad, straggling lines as students milled 
about and looked at them curiously. There were policemen, deputies, a state 
trooper or two; on the lawn, parked beside a couple of official-looking 
vehicles, was a remote radio station hookup, a concessions truck, and a van 
from Action News Twelve. 


"What are all these people doing here?’ I said. 
‘Look,’ she said. 'Is that Francis?’ 


Far away, in the busy multitude, I saw a flash of red hair, the conspicuous 
line of muffled throat and black greatcoat. Camilla stuck up her hand and 
yelled to him. 


He shouldered his way through a bunch of cafeteria workers who had come 
outside to see what was going on. He was smoking a cigarette; there was a 
newspaper tucked under his arm. 'Hello,' he said. 'Can you believe this?’ 


"What's going on?’ 
‘A treasure hunt.' 
‘What?’ 


'The Corcorans put up a big reward in the night. All the factories in 
Hampden are closed. Anybody want some coffee? I have a dollar.’ 


We picked our way to the concessions truck, through a sparse, gloomy 
gathering of janitors and maintenance men. 


"Three coffees, two with milk, please,’ said Francis to the fat woman behind 
the counter. 


"No milk, just Cremora.' 


"Well, then, just black, I guess.’ He turned to us. 'Have you seen the paper 
this morning?’ 


It was a late edition of the Hampden Examiner. In a column on the first page 
was a blurry, recent photograph of Bunny and under it this caption: police, 
kin, seek youth, 24, missing in HAMPDEN. 


"Twenty-four?' I said, startled. The twins and I were twenty years old, and 
Henry and Francis were twenty-one. 


'He failed a grade or two in elementary school,’ said Camilla. 
‘Ahh.’ 


Sunday afternoon Edmund Corcoran, a Hampden College student known to 
his family and friends as 'Bunny,' attended a campus party which he 
apparently left some time in the middle of the afternoon in order to meet his 
girlfriend Marion Barnbridge of Rye, New York, also a student at Hampden. 


That was the last that anyone has seen of Bunny Corcoran. 


The concerned Barnbridge, along with friends of Cor coran's, yesterday 
alerted state and local police, who put out a Missing Persons Bulletin. Today 
the search begins in the Hampden area. The missing youth is described as 
(See p .5) 


‘Are you finished?’ I asked Camilla. 


"Yes. Turn the page.’ being six feet, three inches tall, weighing 190 pounds, 
with sandy blond hair and blue eyes. He wears glasses, and when last seen 
was wearing a gray tweed sports coat, khaki pants, and a yellow rain slicker. 


"Here's your coffee, Richard,’ said Francis, turning gingerly with a cup in 
either hand. 


At St Jerome's preparatory school in College Falls, Massachusetts, Corcoran 
was active in varsity sports, lettering in hockey, lacrosse and crew and leading 
his football team, the Wolverines, to a state championship when he captained 
during senior year. At Hampden Corcoran served as a volunteer fire marshal!. 
He studied literature and languages, with a concentration in Classics, and was 
described by fellow students as 'a scholar.’ 


'Ha,' said Camilla. 


Cloke Rayburn, a school friend of Corcoran's and one of those who first 
notified police, said that Corcoran 'is a real straight guy — definitely not mixed 
up in drugs or anything like that.' 


Yesterday afternoon, after growing suspicious, he broke into Corcoran's 
dormitory room, and subsequently notified police. 


‘That's not right,' Camilla said. 'He didn't call them.' 
‘There's not a word about Charles.' 
"Thank God,' she said, in Greek. 


Corcoran's parents, Macdonald and Katherine Corcoran of Shady Brook, 
Connecticut, arrive in Hampden today to assist in the search for the youngest 
of their five children. 


(See 'A Family Prays,' p .10.) In a telephone interview Mr Corcoran, who is 
president of the Bingham Bank and Trust Company and a member of the 
Board of Directors of the First National Bank of Connecticut, said, "There's 
not much we can do down here. We want to assist if we can.’ He said that he 


had spoken to his son by telephone a week before the disappearance and had 
noticed nothing unusual. 


Of her son, Katherine Corcoran said: 'Edmund is a very family-oriented type 
person. If anything was wrong I know he would have told Mack or myself A 
reward of fifty thousand dollars is being offered for information leading to the 
whereabouts of Edmund Corcoran, provided through contributions from the 
Corcoran family, the Bingham Bank and Trust Company, and the Highland 
Heights Lodge of the Loyal Order of the Moose. 


The wind was blowing. With Camilla's help, I folded the newspaper and 
handed it back to Francis. 'Fifty thousand dollars,’ 


I said. "That's a lot of money.’ 


‘And you wonder why you see all these people from Hampden town up here 
this morning?’ said Francis, taking a sip of his coffee. 'Gosh, it's cold out here.' 


We turned and started back towards Commons. Camilla said to Francis: 'You 
know about Charles and Henry, don't you?’ 


"Well, they told Charles they might want to talk to him, didn't they?’ 
‘But Henry?’ 
'I wouldn't waste my time worrying about him.' 


Commons was overheated and surprisingly empty. The three of us sat on a 
clammy, black vinyl couch and drank our coffee. 


People drifted in and out, bringing blasts of cold air from outdoors; some of 
them came over to ask if there was any news. Jud 'Party Pig' Mac Kenna, as 
Vice-president of the Student Council, came over with his empty paint can to 
ask if we would like to donate to an emergency search fund. Between us, we 
contributed a dollar in change. 


We were talking to Georges Laforgue, who was telling us enthusiastically 
and at great length about a similar disappearance at Brandeis when suddenly, 
from nowhere, Henry appeared behind him. 


Laforgue turned. 'Oh,' he said coldly when he saw who it was. 


Henry inclined his head slightly. ‘Bonjour, Monsieur Laforgue, he said. 
‘Quel plaisir de vous revoir.’ 


Laforgue, with a flourish, took a handkerchief from his pocket and blew his 
nose for what seemed about five minutes; then, refolding the handkerchief 


into fussy little squares, he turned his back on Henry and resumed his story. It 
happened, in this case, that the student had simply gone off to New York City 
on the bus without telling anybody. 


‘And this boy — Birdie, is it?’ 
‘Bunny.’ 


"Yes. This boy has been away for far less long. He will appear again, of his 
own accord, and everyone will feel very foolish,’ He lowered his voice. 'I 
believe that the school is afraid of a lawsuit, and that perhaps is why they lost 
their sense of proportion, no? 


Please do not repeat me.' 
‘Of course not.' 
"My position is delicate with the Dean, you understand. 


Tm a bit tired,’ Henry said later, in the car, 'but there's nothing to worry 
about.’ 


' What'd they want to know?’ 


"Nothing much. How long had I known him, was he acting strangely, did I 
know any reason why he might have decided to leave school. Of course, he 
has been acting strangely the last few months, and I said so. But I also said I 
hadn't seen very much of him lately, which is true.’ He shook his head. 
"Honestly. Two hours. I don't know if I could've made myself go through with 
this if I'd known what nonsense we were letting ourselves in for.’ 


We stopped by the twins' apartment and found Charles asleep on the couch, 
sprawled on his stomach in his shoes and overcoat, one arm dangling over the 
edge so that three or four inches of wrist and an equal amount of cuff were 
exposed. 


He woke with a start. His face was puffy and the ridged pattern from the sofa 
cushions was printed deeply on his cheek. 


‘How did it go?’ said Henry. 


Charles sat up a bit and rubbed his eyes. 'All right, I guess,’ he said. "They 
wanted me to sign some thing that said what happened yesterday.’ 


"They visited me as well.’ 


‘Really? What'd they want?’ 


"The same questions.’ 
"Were they nice to you?’ 
‘Not particularly.’ 


'God, they were so nice to me down at the police station. They even gave me 
breakfast. Coffee and jelly doughnuts.’ 


This was a Friday, which meant no classes, and that Julian was not in 
Hampden but at home. His house was not far from where we were — halfway 
to Albany, where we'd driven to have pancakes at a truck stop — and after 
lunch Henry suggested, quite out of the blue, that we drive by and see if he 
was there. 


I had never been in Julian's house, had never even seen it, though I assumed 
the rest of them had been there a hundred limes. Actually — Henry being of 
course the notable exception — Julian did not allow many visitors. This was 
not so surprising as it sounds; he kept a gentle but firm distance between 
himself and his students; and though he was much more fond of us than 
teachers generally are of their pupils, it was not, even with Henry, a 
relationship of equals, and our classes with him ran more along the lines of 
benevolent dictatorship than democracy. 'I am your teacher,’ he once said, 
‘because I know more than you do.' 


Though on a psychological level his manner was almost painfully intimate, 
superficially it was businesslike and cold. He refused to see anything about 
any of us except our most engaging qualities, which he cultivated and 
magnified to the exclusion of all our tedious and less desirable ones. While I 
felt a delicious pleasure in adjusting myself to fit this attractive if inaccurate 
image — and, eventually, in finding that I had more or less become the 
character which for a long time I had so skillfully played — there was never 
any doubt that he did not wish to see us in our entirety, or see us, in fact, in 
anything other than the magnificent roles he had invented for us: genis grains, 
corpore glabelliis, arte multiscius, et fortuna opulentus — smooth-cheeked, 
soft-skinned, welleducated, and rich. It was his odd blindness, I think, to all 
problems of a personal nature which made him able at the end to transmute 
even Bunny's highly substantive troubles into spiritual ones. 


I knew then, and know now, virtually nothing about Julian's life outside of 
the classroom, which is perhaps what lent such a tantalizing breath of mystery 
to everything he said or did. No doubt his personal life was as flawed as 
anyone's, but the only side of himself he ever allowed us to see was polished 
to such a high gloss of perfection that it seemed when he was away from us he 
must lead an existence too rarefied for me to even imagine. 


So, naturally, I was curious to see where he lived. It was a large stone house, 
set on a hill, miles off the main road and nothing but trees and snow as far as 
one could see — imposing enough, but not half so Gothic and monstrous as 
Francis's. I had heard marvelous tales of his garden, also of the inside of the 
house — Attic vases, Meissen porcelain, paintings by Alma-Tadema and Frith. 
But the garden was covered with snow, and Julian, apparently, was not at 
home; at least he didn't answer the door. 


Henry looked back down the hill to where we waited in the car. He reached 
into his pocket for a piece of paper and scribbled a note that he folded and 
wedged in the crack of the door. 


‘Are there students out with the search parties?’ Henry asked on the way back 
to Hampden. 'I don't want to go down there if we'll be making ourselves 
conspicuous. But on the other hand, it does seem rather callous, don't you 
think, to just go home?’ 


He was quiet a moment, thinking. 'Maybe we should have a look,’ he said. 
‘Charles, you've done quite enough for one day. 


Maybe you should just go home.’ 


After we dropped the twins off, the three of us went on to campus. I had 
expected that by now the search party would have grown tired and gone home 
but I was surprised to find the enterprise busier than ever. There were 
policemen, college administrators, Boy Scouts, maintenance workers and 
security guards, about thirty Hampden students (some in an official, student- 
councily-looking group, the rest just along for the ride), and mobs of 
townspeople. It was a large assembly, but as the three of us looked down at it 
from the top of the rise, it seemed oddly muffled and small in the great 
expanse of snow. 


We went down the hill — Francis, sulky because he hadn't wanted to come, 
followed two or three paces behind — and wandered through the crowd. No 
one paid us the least bit of attention. 


Behind me I heard the indistinct, aborted garble of a walkie-talkie; and, 
startled, I walked backwards into the Chief of Security. 


"Watch it,' he shouted. He was a squat, bulldoggish man with liver spots on 
his nose and jowls. 


‘Sorry,’ I said hastily. 'Can you tell me what ' 


‘College kids,’ he muttered, turning his head away as if to spit. 


‘Stumbling around, getting in the way, don't know what the hell you're 
supposed to do.’ 


"Well, that's what we're trying to find out,’ snapped Henry. 


The guard turned quickly, and somehow his gaze landed not on Henry but on 
Francis, who was standing staring into space. 


‘So it's you, is it?’ he said with venom. 'Mr Off-Campus who thinks he can 
park in the faculty parking lot.’ 


Francis started, a wild look in his eye. 


"Yes, you. You know how many unpaid violations you're carrying? Nine. I 
turned your registration in to the Dean just last week. They can put you on 
probation, hold your transcripts, what have you. Suspend your library 
privileges. If it was up to me they'd put you in jail.’ 


Francis gaped at him. Henry caught him by the sleeve and pulled him away. 


A long, straggly line of townspeople was crunching through the snow, some 
of them swiping listlessly at the ground with sticks. We walked to the end of 
the queue, then fell into step with them. 


The knowledge that Bunny's body actually lay about two miles to the 
southwest did not lend much interest or urgency to the search, and I plodded 
along in a daze, my eyes on the ground. 


At the front of the rank an authoritative cluster of state troopers and 
policemen marched ahead, heads bent, talking in low voices as a barking 
German shepherd dog circled around them at a trot. 


The air had a heavy quality and the sky over the mountains was overcast and 
stormy. Francis's coat whipped out behind him in theatrical billows; he kept 
glancing furtively around to see if his inquisitor was anywhere nearby and 
from time to time he emitted a faint, self-pitying cough. 


"Why the hell haven't you paid those parking tickets?' Henry whispered to 
him. 


"Leave me alone.’ 


We crept through the snow for what seemed like hours, until the energetic 
needle pricks in my feet subsided to an uncomfortable numbness; heavy boots 
of policemen, crunching black in the snow, night sticks swinging ponderously 
from heavy belts. A helicopter overhead swooped in with a roar over the trees, 


hovered above us for a moment, then darted back the way it had come. The 
light was thinning and people were trailing up the trampled hillside towards 
home. 


‘Let's go,’ said Francis, for the fourth or fifth time. 


We were starting away at last when a strolling policeman stopped in front of 
our path. 'Had enough?' he said, smiling, a big red-faced guy with a red 
moustache. 


'I believe so,’ said Henry. 

"You kids know that boy?’ 

"As a matter of fact, we do.’ 

"No ideas where he might of went off to?’ 


If this was a movie, I thought, looking pleasantly into the pleasant beefy face 
of the policeman — if this was a movie, we'd all be fidgeting and acting really 
suspicious. 


"How much does a television cost?’ said Henry on the way home. 
"Why? 

"Because I'd like to see the news tonight.’ 

'I think they're kind of expensive,’ said Francis. 

‘There's a television in the attic of Monmouth,’ I said. 

"Does it belong to anyone?’ 

Tm sure it does.’ 

"Well,' said Henry, ‘we'll take it back when we're finished with it.’ 


Francis kept watch while Henry and I went up to the attic and searched 
through broken lamps, cardboard boxes, ugly Art I oil paintings. Finally we 
found the television behind an old rabbit hutch and carried it down the stairs 
to Henry's car. On the way over to Francis's, we stopped by for the twins. 


"The Corcorans have been trying to get in touch with you this afternoon,’ said 
Camilla to Henry. 


"Mr Corcoran's called half a dozen times.' 


‘Julian called, too. He's very upset. 
‘And Cloke,' said Charles. 
Henry stopped. 'What did he want?’ 


‘He wanted to make sure that you and I hadn't said anything about drugs 
when we talked to the police this morning.’ 


"What did you tell him?' 
'I said I hadn't, but I didn't know about you.' 


‘Come on,’ said Francis, glancing at his watch. "We're going to miss it if you 
don't hurry.’ 


We put the television on Francis's dining room table and fooled around with 
it until we got a decent picture. The final credits of ‘Petticoat Junction’ were 
rolling past, over shots of the Hooter ville water tower, the Cannonball 
express. 


The news was next. As the theme song died away, a small circle appeared in 
the left-hand corner of the newscaster's desk; within it was a stylized picture 
of a policeman shining a flashlight and holding a straining dog back by a leash 
and, underneath, the word MANHUNT. 


The newscaster looked at the camera. 'Hundreds search and thousands pray,’ 
she said, 'as the hunt for Hampden College student Edmund Corcoran begins 
in the Hampden area.' 


The picture shifted to a pan of a thickly wooded area; a line of searchers, 
filmed from behind, beat in the underbrush with sticks, while the German 
shepherd dog we had seen earlier laughed and barked at us from the screen. 


"Where are you guys?’ said Camilla. 'Are you in there somewhere?' 
‘Look,’ said Francis. "There's that horrible man.' 


‘One hundred volunteers,’ said the voice-over, ‘arrived this morning to help 
Hampden College students in the search for their classmate, who has been 
missing since Sunday afternoon. 


Until now there have been no leads in the search for the twenty four-year-old 
Edmund Corcoran, of Shady Brook, Connecticut, but Action News Twelve 
has just received an important phone tip which authorities think may provide a 
new angle in the case.’ 


"What?' said Charles, to the television set. 
"We go now to Rick Dobson, live on the scene.’ 


The picture switched to a man in a trench coat, holding a microphone and 
standing in front of what appeared to be a gas station. 


'I know that place,’ said Francis, leaning forward. 'That's Redeemed Repair 
on Highway 6.' 


‘Ssh,’ somebody said. 


The wind was blowing hard. The microphone shrieked, then died down with 
a sputtering noise. 'This afternoon,’ the reporter said, chin low, ‘at one-fifty-six 
p. m., Action News Twelve received an important piece of information which 
may provide a break for police in the recent Hampden missing-persons case.' 


The camera pulled back to reveal an old man in coveralls, a woolen cap, and 
a greasy dark windbreaker. He was staring to the side in a fixed manner; his 
head was round and his face as bland and untroubled as a baby's. 


'I am now with William Hundy,' the reporter said, ‘co-owner of Redeemed 
Repair in Hampden, a member of the Hampden County Rescue Squad who 
has just come forward with this information.’ 


Henry,’ said Francis. I was startled to see that his face had all of a sudden 
got very white. 


Henry reached in his pocket for a cigarette. 'Yes,' he said tersely. 'I see.' 
"What's the matter?’ I said. 


Henry tamped the cigarette down on the side of the pack. He didn't take his 
eyes from the screen. 'That man,’ he said, ‘fixes my car. 


"Mr Hundy,' said the reporter, 'will you tell us what you saw on Sunday 
afternoon? 


‘Oh, my God,’ said Charles. 
Hush,’ said Henry. 
The mechanic glanced shyly at the camera, and then away. 


‘Sunday afternoon,’ he said, in a nasal Vermont voice, 'there was a cream- 
colored Le Mans, few years old, pulled up to that pump over there.’ 
Awkwardly, as an afterthought, he raised his arm and pointed somewhere off 


camera. 'It was three men, two in the front seat, one in the back. Out-of- 
towners. Seemed in a hurry. Wouldn't have thought a thing of it except that 
boy was with them. I recognized him when I saw his picture in the paper.’ 


My heart had nearly stopped — three men, white car — but then the details 
registered. We were four, with Camilla, too, and Bunny hadn't been anywhere 
near the car on Sunday. And Henry drove a BMW, which was far from a 
Pontiac. 


Henry had stopped tapping the unlit cigarette on the side of the pack; it 
dangled loosely between his fingers. 


‘Although no ransom note has been received by the Corcoran family, 
authorities have not yet ruled out the possibility of kidnapping. 


This is Rick Dobson, reporting live from Action News Twelve.’ 


"Thank you, Rick. If any of our viewers have further information on this or 
any other story, they are urged to call our Tips Line, 363-TIPS, between the 
hours of nine and five... 


"Today the Hampden County School Board took a vote on what may be the 
most controversial We stared at the television in astonished silence for what 
seemed several minutes. Finally the twins looked at each other and started to 
laugh. 


Henry shook his head, still looking incredulously at the screen. 'Vermonters,' 
he said. 


"Do you know this man?’ said Charles. 
Tve taken my car to him for the last two years.’ 
Is he crazy?’ 


He shook his head again. 'Crazy, lying, out for the reward. I don't know what 
to say. He always seemed sane enough, though he did drag me off in a corner 
once and start talking about Christ's kingdom on earth.' 


"Well, for whatever reason,’ said Francis, ‘he's done us a tremendous favor.' 


'I don't know,’ said Henry. 'Kidnapping is a serious crime. If this turns into a 
criminal investigation they may stumble across something we'd rather they 
didn't know. 


"How could they? What does any of this have to do with us?! 


'I don't mean anything big. But there are a great many little things which 
would be just as damning if anyone took the trouble to add them up. I was a 
fool to put those plane tickets on my credit card, for instance. We'd have a 
difficult time explaining that. And your trust fund, Francis? And our bank 
accounts? 


Massive withdrawals over the last six months, and nothing to show for it. 
Bunny's got an awful lot of new clothes hanging in his closet that he couldn't 
possibly have paid for himself ‘Somebody would have to dig pretty deep to 
find that.' 


‘Someone would only have to make two or three well-placed phone calls.’ 
Just then the telephone rang. 

‘Oh, God,' Francis wailed. 

‘Don't answer it,’ said Henry. 


But Francis picked it up anyway, as I knew he would. 'Yes,’ he said 
carefully. Pause. 'Well, hello to you too, Mr Corcoran,’ he said, sitting down 
and giving us the OK signal with thumb and forefinger. 'Have you heard 
anything?’ 


A very long pause. Francis listened attentively for some minutes, looking at 
the floor and nodding; after a while he began to bob his foot up and down 
impatiently. 


"What's going on?' Charles whispered. 


Francis held the phone away from his ear and made a gabby mouth sign with 
his hand. 


'I know what he wants,’ Charles said bleakly. 'He wants us to come over to 
his hotel and have dinner.’ 


‘Actually, sir, we've already had our dinner,’ Francis was saying. '... No, of 
course not... Yes. Oh, yes sir, I've been trying to get in touch with you, but 
you know how confused things are... Certainly...’ 


Finally he hung up. We stared at him. 


He shrugged. 'Well,' he said, 'I tried. He's expecting us at the hotel in twenty 
minutes. 


"Us?! 


Tm not going by myself 'Is he alone?’ 


'No.' Francis had drifted into the kitchen; we could hear him opening and 
shutting cabinets. 'It's the whole crew except for Teddy, and they're expecting 
him any minute.’ 


There was a slight pause. 

"What are you doing in there?’ said Henry. 

"Making myself a drink.’ 

"Make me one, too,’ said Charles. 

‘Scotch all right?’ 

Td rather bourbon if you've got it.' 

"Make that two,' said Camilla. 

‘Just bring the whole bottle in, why don't you,' Henry said. 


After they left, I lay on Francis's couch, smoking his cigarettes and drinking 
his Scotch, and watched ‘Jeopardy.’ One of the contestants was from San 
Gilberto, which is really close to where I grew up, only five or six miles away. 
All those suburbs tend to run into one another out there, so you can't always 
tell where one ends and the next begins. 


After that came a made-for-television movie. It was about the threat of the 
earth colliding with another planet and how all the scientists in the world 
united to avert the catastrophe. A hack astronomer, who is constantly on talk 
shows and whose name you would probably recognize, played himself in a 
cameo role. 


For some reason, I felt uneasy about watching the news alone when it came 
on at eleven, so I turned to PBS and watched something called 'History of 
Metallurgy.’ It was actually quite interesting, but I was tired and a bit drunk, 
and I fell asleep before it ended. 


When I awoke, a blanket had been thrown over me, and the room was blue 
with a cold dawn light. Francis sat in the windowsill with his back to me; he 
was wearing his clothes from the night before and he was eating maraschino 
cherries from ajar balanced on his knee. 


I sat up. ‘What time is it?’ 


'Six,' he said without turning around, his mouth full. 


"Why didn't you wake me up?’ 
'I didn't get in until four-thirty. Too drunk to drive you home. 
Want a cherry?’ 


He was still drunk. His collar was open and his clothes disordered; his voice 
was flat and toneless. 


"Where were you all night?’ 
"With the Corcorans.' 

"Not drinking.’ 

‘Of course. 

Till four?’ 


'They were still going at it when we left. There were five or six cases of beer 
in the bathtub.’ 


'I didn't know it was going to be a frivolous occasion.’ 


‘It was donated by the Food King,’ said Francis. "The beer, I mean. Mr 
Corcoran and Brady got hold of some of it and brought it to the hotel.’ 


"Where are they staying?’ 


'I don't know,’ he said dully. 'Terrible place. One of those big flat motels with 
a neon sign and no room service. All the rooms were connected. Hugh's 
children screaming and throwing potato rhips, the television going in every 
room. It was hell... Really,’ he said humorlessly as I started to laugh, 'I think I 
could get through anything after last night. Survive a nuclear war. Fly a plane. 
Somebody — one of those damned toddlers, I guess — got my favorite scarf off 
the bed and wrapped up part of a chicken leg in it. That nice silk one with the 
pattern of clocks on it. It's just ruined.’ 


"Were they upset?’ 
"Who, the Corcorans? Of course not. I don't think they even noticed. 


'I don't mean about the scarf 'Oh.' He got another cherry from the jar. "They 
were all upset I suppose, in a way. Nobody talked about much else but they 
didn't seem out of their minds or anything. Mr Corcoran would act all sad and 
worried for a while, then the next thing you knew he'd be playing with the 
baby, giving everybody beer.’ 


"Was Marion there?’ 


"Yes. Cloke, too. He went for a drive with Brady and Patrick and came back 
reeking of pot. Henry and I sat on the radiator all night and talked to Mr 
Corcoran. I guess Camilla went over to say hello to Hugh and his wife and got 
trapped. I don't even know what happened to Charles." 


After a moment or so, Francis shook his head. 'I don't know,’ he said. "Does it 
ever strike you, in a horrible sort of way, how funny this is?’ 


"Well, it's not all that funny really.’ 
'I guess not,’ he said, lighting a cigarette with shaky hands. 


‘And Mr Corcoran said the National Guard is coming up today, too. What a 
mess.’ 


For some time I had been staring at the jar of cherries without realizing fully 
what they were. 'Why are you eating those?’ I said. 


'I don't know,’ he said, staring down at the jar. "They taste really bad.’ 
"Throw them away.’ 

He struggled with the window sash. It sailed up with a grinding noise. 
A blast of icy air hit me in the face. 'Hey,'I said. 


He threw the jar out the window and then leaned on the sash with all his 
weight. I went over to help him. Finally, it crashed down, and the draperies 
floated down to rest placidly by the windows. The cherry juice had left a 
spattered red trajectory on the snow. 


"Kind of a Jean Cocteau touch, isn't it?' Francis said. T'm exhausted. If you 
don't mind, I'm going to have a bath now.’ 


He was running the water and I was on my way out when the phone rang. 
It was Henry. 'Oh,' he said. 'I'm sorry. I thought I dialed Francis. 
"You did. Hold on a second.’ I put down the phone and called for him. 


He came in in his trousers and undershirt, his face half-lathered, a razor in 
his hand. "Who is it?’ 


"Henry. 


‘Tell him I'm in the bath.’ 
"He's in the bath,’ I said. 


"He is not in the bath,’ said Henry. 'He is standing in the room with you. I can 
hear him.' 


I gave Francis the telephone. He held it away from his face so he wouldn't 
get any soap on the receiver. 


I could hear Henry talking indistinctly. After a moment, Francis's sleepy 
eyes widened. 


‘Oh, no,' he said. 'Not me.' 
Henry's voice again, curt and businesslike. 
"No. I mean it, Henry. I'm tired and I'm going to sleep and there's no way-' 


Suddenly, his face changed. To my great surprise he cursed loudly and 
slammed down the receiver so hard that it jangled. 


"What is it?’ 


He was staring at the phone. 'God damn him,’ he said. 'He hung up on me,’ 
"What's the matter?’ 


'He wants us to go out with that damn search party again. Now. 

I'm not like he is. I can't just stay up for five or six days at a ' 

"Now? But it's so early.’ 

‘It started an hour ago, so he says. Damn him. Doesn't he ever sleep?’ 


We had not spoken about the incident in my room several nights before and, 
in the drowsy silence of the car, I felt the need to make things plain. 


"You know, Francis,' I said. 

"What?' 

It seemed the best thing was just to come right out and say it. 

"You know,’ I said, 'I'm really not attracted to you. I mean, not that-' 


‘Isn't that interesting,’ he said coolly. 'I'm really not attracted to you, either.’ 


"But-' 

"You were there.’ 

We drove the rest of the way to school in a not very comfortable silence. 
Unbelievably, things had escalated even more during the night. 


There now were hundreds of people: people in uniforms, people with dogs 
and bullhorns and cameras, people buying sweet rolls from the concessions 
truck and trying to peek into the dark windows of the news vans — three of 
them, one from a station in Boston — parked on Commons lawn, along with 
the overflow of vehicles from the parking lot. 


We found Henry on the front porch of Commons. He was reading, with 
absorbed interest, a tiny, vellum-bound book I written in some Near Eastern 
language. The twins — sleepy, red nosed, rumpled — were sprawled on a bench 
like a couple of ™ teenagers, passing a cup of coffee back and forth. 


Francis half nudged, half kicked the toe of Henry's shoe. 
Henry started. 'Oh,' he said. 'Good morning.’ 


"How can you even say that? I haven't had a wink of sleep. I haven't eaten 
anything in about three days.' 


Henry marked his place with a ribbon and slipped the book in his breast 
pocket. 'Well,'he said amiably, 'go get a doughnut, then.’ 


'I don't have any money.’ 

TIl give you the money, then.’ 

'I don't want a goddamn doughnut.’ 

I went over and sat down with the twins. 


"You missed quite a time last night,’ said Charles to me. J[ 'So I hear.’ *jt\ 
"Hugh's wife showed us baby pictures for an hour and a half.' 


"Yes, at least,’ said Camilla. 'And Henry drank a beer from a can.' 
Silence. 
‘So what did you do?' Charles said. 


‘Nothing. Watched a movie on TV.' 


They both perked up. 'Oh, really? The thing about the planets colliding?’ 


"Mr Corcoran had it on but somebody switched channels before it was over,' 
said Camilla. 


"How'd it end? 
"What's the last part you saw? 


"They were in the mountain laboratory. The young enthusiastic scientists had 
all ganged up on that cynical old scientist who didn't want to help.’ 


I was explaining the denouement when Cloke Raybum abruptly shouldered 
through the crowd. I stopped talking, thinking he was headed for the twins 
and me, but instead he only nodded to us and walked up to Henry, who now 
was standing on the edge of the porch. 


‘Listen,’ I heard him say. 'I didn't get a chance to talk to you last night. I got 
hold of those guys in New York and Bunny hasn't been there.’ 


Henry didn't say anything for a moment. Then he said: 'I thought you said 
you couldn't get in touch with them.’ 


"Well, it's possible, it's just like a big headache. But they hadn't seen him, 
anyway.’ 


"How do you know?’ 

"What?' 

'I thought you said you couldn't believe a word they said.’ 
He looked startled. 'I did?’ 

"Yes. 


"Hey, listen to me,’ said Cloke, taking off his sunglasses. His eyes were 
bloodshot and pouchy. "These guys are telling the truth. I didn't think of this 
before — well, I guess it hasn't been that long — but anyway, the story's all over 
the New York papers. 


If they really did something to him, they wouldn't be sticking around their 
apartment taking phone calls from me... What is it, man?’ he said nervously 
when Henry didn't respond. 'You didn't say anything to anybody, did you?’ 


Henry made an indistinct noise in the back of his throat, which might have 
meant anything. 


"What?' 
"No one has asked,’ said Henry. 


There was no expression on his face. Cloke, his discomfiture evident, waited 
for him to continue. Finally, he put on his sunglasses again in a slightly 
defensive manner. 


"Well,' he said. 'Um. Okay, then. See you later.' 


After he'd gone Francis turned to Henry, a bemused look on his face. "What 
on earth are you up to?’ he said. 


But Henry didn't answer. 


The day passed like a dream. Voices, dogs barking, the whap of a helicopter 
overhead. The wind was strong and the roar of it in I the trees was like an 
ocean. The helicopter had been sent from ,— the New York State Police 
headquarters in Albany; it had, we ™ were told, a special infrared heat sensor. 
Someone had also volunteered something called an ‘ultra-light’ aircraft which 
swooped overhead, barely clearing the tops of the trees. There were real ranks 
now, squadron leaders with bullhorns; we marched over the snowy hills wave 
upon wave. 


Cornfields, pastures, knolls heavy with undergrowth. As we approached the 
base of the mountain the land took a downward slope. A thick fog lay in the 
valley below, a smoldering cauldron of white from which only the treetops 
protruded, stark and Dantesque. By degrees, we descended, and the world 
sank from view. Charles, beside me, stood out sharp and almost hyper 
realistic with his ruddy cheeks and labored breaths but further down, Henry 
had become a wraith, his large form light and strangely insubstantial in the 
mist. 


When the ground rose several hours later, we came up on the rear of another, 
smaller party. In it were some people I was surprised and somehow touched to 
see. There was Martin Hoffer, an old and distinguished composer on the 
music faculty; the middle-aged lady who checked IDs in the lunch line, 
looking inexplicably tragic in her plain cloth coat; Dr Roland, the blares of his 
nose-blowing audible even at a distance. 


‘Look,’ said Charles. 'That's not Julian, is it?’ 
"Where?’ 


‘Surely not,’ said Henry. 


But it was. Rather characteristically, he pretended not to see us until we were 
so close it was impossible for him to ignore us any longer. He was listening to 
a tiny, fox-faced lady whom I knew to be a housekeeper in the dorms. 


‘Goodness,’ he said, when she had finished talking, drawing back in mock 
surprise. 'Where did you come from? Do you know Mrs O'Rourke?’ 


Mrs O'Rourke smiled shyly. 'I seen all of you before,’ she said. 
The kids think the maids don't notice them, but I know you all by sight.’ 


"Well, I should hope so,’ said Charles. "You haven't forgotten me, have you? 
Bishop House, number ten?’ 


He said this so warmly that she flushed with pleasure. 


‘Sure,’ she said. 'I remember you. You was the one was always running off 
with my broom.’ 


During this exchange Henry and Julian were talking softly. 
"You should have told me before now,’ I heard Julian say. 
"We did tell you.’ 


"Well, you did, but still. Edmund's missed class before,’ said Julian, looking 
distressed. 'I thought he was playing sick. People are saying that he's been 
kidnapped but I think that's rather silly, don't you?’ 


Td rather one of mine be kidnapped than out in this snow for six days,’ said 
Mrs O'Rourke. 


"Well, I certainly hope that nothing has happened to him. You know, don't 
you, that his family is here? Have you seen them?’ 


"Not today,’ said Henry. 


‘Of course, of course,’ said Julian hastily. He disliked the Corcorans. 'I 
haven't been to see them either, it's really not the time to intrude... This 
morning I did run into the father quite by accident, and one of the brothers as 
well. He had a baby with him. Riding it on his shoulders as if they were on 
their way to a picnic. 


‘Little one like him had no business being out in this weather,’ said Mrs 
O'Rourke. 'Hardly three years old.’ 


"Yes, I'm afraid I agree. I can't imagine why anyone would have a baby along 


on something like this." 
'I certainly wouldn't have let one of mine yell and carry on like that.’ 


‘Perhaps it was cold,’ murmured Julian. The tone he used was a delicate cue 
that he had tired of the subject and wished to stop talking about it. 


Henry cleared his throat. 'Did you talk to Bunny's father?’ he said. 


‘Only for a moment. He — well, I suppose we all have different ways of 
handling these things... Edmund looks a great deal like him, doesn't he?' 


"All the brothers do,' said Camilla. 


Julian smiled. 'Yes! And so many of them! Like something from a fairy 
story...' He glanced at his watch. 'Goodness,' he said, ‘it's late.’ 


Francis started from his morose silence. 'Are you leaving now?' he asked 
Julian anxiously. 'Do you want me to drive you?’ 


This was a blatant attempt at escape. Henry's nostrils flared, not so much in 
anger as in a kind of exasperated amusement: he gave Francis a dirty look, but 
then Julian, who was gazing into the distance and quite unaware of the drama 
which hinged on his reply, shook his head. 


"No, thank you,' he said. 'Poor Edmund. I'm really quite worried, you know.’ 
‘Just think how his parents must feel,’ said Mrs O'Rourke. 


"Yes,' said Julian, in a tone of voice which managed to convey at once both 
sympathy with and distaste for the Corcorans. 


T'd be wild if it was me.’ 


Unexpectedly, Julian shuddered and turned up the collar of his coat. 'Last 
night I was so upset I could hardly sleep,’ he said. 


"He's such a sweet boy, so silly; I'm really very fond of him. If anything 
should have happened to him I don't know if I could bear it.' 


He was looking over the hills, at all that grand cinematic expanse of men and 
wilderness and snow that lay beneath us; and though his voice was anxious 
there was a strange dreamy look on his face. The business had upset him, that 
I knew, but I also knew that there was something about the operatic sweep of 
the search which could not fail to appeal to him and that he was pleased, 
however obscurely, with the aesthetics of the thing. r ™ Henry saw it, too. 
‘Like something from Tolstoy, isn't it?' he remarked. 


Julian looked over his shoulder, and I was startled to see that there was real 
delight on his face. 'Yes,' he said. 'Isn't it, though?’ 


At about two in the afternoon, two men in dark overcoats walked up to us 
from nowhere. 


‘Charles Macaulay?’ said the shorter of the two. He was a barrel-chested 
fellow with hard, genial eyes. 


Charles, beside me, stopped and looked at him blankly. 

The man reached in his breast pocket and flipped out a badge. 
‘Agent Harvey Davenport, Northeast Regional Division, FBI.' 
For a moment I thought Charles might lose his composure. 
"What do you want?’ he said, blinking. 


"We'd like to talk to you, if you don't mind,’ 'It won't take long,’ said the taller 
man. He was an Italian with stooped shoulders and a sad, doughy nose. His 
voice was soft and pleasant. 


Henry, Francis, Camilla had all stopped and were staring at the strangers 
with varying degrees of interest and alarm. 


‘Besides,’ said Davenport snappily. 'Good to get out of the cold for a minute 
or two. Bet you're freezing your balls off, huh?’ 


After they left, the rest of us were bristling with anxiety, but of course we 
couldn't talk and so we continued to shuffle along, eyes on the ground and half 
afraid to look up. Soon it was three o'clock, then four. Things were far from 
over, but at the first premature signs that the day's search was breaking up we 
headed rapidly and silently for the car. 


"What do you suppose they want with him?’ said Camilla for about the tenth 
time. 


'I don't know,’ said Henry. 


"He gave them a statement already.’ *jjjl 'He gave the police one. Not these 
people.’ 


"What difference does it make? Why would they want to talk to him?’ 


'I don't know, Camilla.’ 


When we got to the twins’ apartment we were relieved to find Charles there, 
alone. He was lying on the couch, a drink on the table beside him, talking to 
his grandmother on the telephone. 


He was a little drunk. 'Nana says hi,’ he said to Camilla when he got off the 
phone. ‘She's all worried. Some bug or something has got up into her azaleas.’ 


"What's that all over your hands?’ said Camilla sharply. 


He held them out, palms up, none too steadily. The tips of the fingers were 
black. 'They took my fingerprints,’ he said. 'It was kind of interesting. I'd 
never had it done before." 


For a moment we were all too shocked to say anything. Henry stepped 
forward, took one of his hands and examined it beneath the light. "Do you 
know why they did it?’ he said. 


Charles wiped his brow with the back of his free wrist. 'They've sealed off 
Bunny's room,’ he said. 'Some people are in there dusting for prints and 
putting things in plastic bags.’ 


Henry dropped his hand. 'But why?’ 


'I don't know why. They wanted the fingerprints of everybody who'd been in 
the room on Thursday and touched things.’ 


"What good will that do? They don't have Bunny's fingerprints. 


‘Apparently they do have them. Bunny was in the Boy Scouts and his troop 
went in and was fingerprinted for some kind of Law Enforcement badge, 
years ago. They're still on file somewhere.’ 


Henry sat down. 'Why did they want to talk to you?’ 
‘That was the first thing they asked me. 
"What?' 


' «Why do you think we want to talk to you.” He dragged the heel of his 
hand down the side of his face. These people are smart, Henry,’ he said. 'A lot 
smarter than the police.’ 


"How did they treat you?’ 


Charles shrugged. The one called Davenport was pretty brusque. The other 
one — the Italian — was nicer, but he scared me. Didn't say much, just listened. 
He's much more clever than the other one 'Well?' said Henry impatiently. 


"What is it?’ 


"Nothing. We... I don't know. We've got to be really careful, that's all. They 
tried to trip me up more than once. 


"What do you mean?’ 


"Well, when I told them Cloke and I had gone down to Bunny's room around 
four on Thursday, for instance.’ 


That's when you did go,' said Francis. 


'I know that. But the Italian — really, he's a very pleasant man — began to look 
all concerned. «Can that be right, son?» he said. 


«Think.» I was really confused, because I knew we went at four, and then 
Davenport said, «You'd better think about it, because your buddy Cloke told 
us you two were down at that room for a solid hour before you called 
anybody." 


They wanted to see if you and Cloke had anything to hide,' 
Henry said. 

'Maybe. Maybe they just wanted to see if I would lie about it.' 
'Did you?' 


'No. But if they'd asked me something a little touchier, and I was kind of 
scared... You don't realize what it's like. There are two of them, and only one 
of you, and you don't have much time to think... I know, I know,' he said 
despairingly. 'But it's not like the police. These small-town cops don't actually 
expect to find anything. They'd be shocked to know the truth, probably 
wouldn't believe it if you told them. But these guys...» He shuddered. 'I never 
realized, you know, how much we rely on appearances,' he said. 'It's not that 
we're so smart, it's just that we don't look like we did it. We might as well be a 
bunch of Sunday-school teachers as far as everyone else is concerned. But 
these guys won't be taken in by that.' He picked up his glass and took a drink. 
'By the way,' he said, 'they asked a million questions about your trip to Italy,’ 
Henry glanced up, startled. 'Did they ask at all about the finances? Who paid 
for it?’ 


"No.' Charles finished off the glass and rattled the ice around for a moment. 'I 
was terrified they would. But I think they were kind of overly impressed by 
the Corcorans. I think if I told them that Bunny never wore the same pair of 
underpants twice they would probably believe me. 


"What about that Vermonter?' Francis said. 'The one on television last night?’ 


'I don't know. They were a lot more interested in Cloke than anything else, it 
seemed to me. Maybe they just wanted to make sure his story matched up 
with mine, but there were a couple of really strange questions that — I don't 
know. I wouldn't be surprised if he's going around telling people this theory of 
his, that Bunny was kidnapped by drug dealers.’ 


‘Certainly not,’ said Francis. 


"Well, he told us, and we're not even his friends. Though the FBI men seem 
to think he and I are on intimate terms.’ 


'I hope you took pains to correct them,’ said Henry, lighting a cigarette. 
Tm sure Cloke would have set them straight on that account.’ 


"Not necessarily,’ said Henry. He shook out his match and threw it in an 
ashtray; then he inhaled deeply on his cigarette. 


"You know,’ he said, 'I thought at first that this association with Cloke was a 
great misfortune. Now I see it's one of the best things that could have 
happened to us.’ 


Before anyone could ask him what he meant, he glanced at his watch. 
‘Goodness,’ he said. 'We'd better go. It's almost six.' 


On the way to Francis's, a pregnant dog ran across the road in front oi us. 
‘That,’ said Henry, 'is a very bad omen. 
But of what he wouldn't say. 


The news was just beginning. The anchorman glanced up from his papers, 
looking grave but at the same time very pleased. 'The frantic search — thus far 
a fruitless one — continues, for missing Hampden College student Edward 
Corcoran. 


'Gosh,' said Camilla, reaching into her brother's coat pocket for a cigarette. 
"You'd think they'd get his name right, don't you?’ 


The picture cut to an aerial shot of snowy hills, dotted like a war map with 
pinprick figures, Mount Cataract looming lopsided and huge in the 
foreground. 


‘An estimated three hundred searchers,’ said the voiceover, ‘including 
National Guard, police, Hampden firefighters and Central Vermont Public 


Service employees, combed the hard-to reach area on this, Day Two of the 
search. In addition, the FBI has launched an investigation of its own in 
Hampden today.’ 


The picture wobbled, then switched abruptly to a lean, white haired man in a 
cowboy hat who the caption informed us was Dick Postonkill, Hampden 
County sheriff. He was talking, but no sound came from his mouth; searchers 
milled curiously in the snowy background, raising on tiptoe to jeer silently at 
the camera. 


After a few moments, the audio lurched on with a jerky, garbled sound. The 
sheriff was in the middle of a sentence. 


‘— to remind hikers,’ he said, 'to go out in groups, stay on the trail, leave a 
projected itinerary and carry plenty of warm clothing in case of sudden drops 
in temperature. 


That was Hampden County sheriff Dick Postonkill,’ said the anchorman 
brightly, 'with a few tips for our viewers on winter hiking safety.’ He turned, 
and the camera zoomed in on him at a different angle. ‘One of the only leads 
so far in the Corcoran disappearance case has been provided by William 
Hundy, a local businessman and Action News Twelve viewer, who phoned 
our TIPS line with information regarding the missing youth. Today Mr Hundy 
has been cooperating with state and local authorities in providing a 
description of Corcoran's alleged abductors ' «State and local,"' said Henry. 


"What?' 
"Not federal.’ 


‘Of course not,' said Charles. "Do you think the FBI is going to believe some 
dumb story that a Vermonter made up?’ 


"Well, if they don't, why are they here?’ said Henry. 


This was a disconcerting thought. In the brilliant, delayed-tape noontime 
sun, a group of men hurried down the courthouse steps. Mr Hundy, his head 
down, was among them. His hair was slicked back and he wore, in lieu of his 
service station uniform, a baby-blue leisure suit. 


A reporter — Liz Ocavello, a sort of local celebrity, with her own current- 
issues program and a segment called 'Movie Beat’ on the local news — 
approached, microphone in hand. 'Mr Hundy,' she said. 'Mr Hundy.' 


He stopped, confused, as his companions walked ahead and left him standing 
alone on the steps. Then they realized what was going on and came back up to 


huddle around him in an official-looking cluster. They grabbed Hundy by the 
elbows and made as if to hustle him away but he hung back, reluctant. 


"Mr Hundy,' said Liz Ocavello, nudging her way in. 'I understand you have 
been working today with police artists on composite drawings of the persons 
you saw with the missing boy on Sunday.’ 


Mr Hundy nodded rather briskly. His shy, evasive manner of the day before 
had given way to a slightly more assertive stance. 


‘Could you tell us what they looked like?’ 


The men surged around Mr Hundy once more, but he seemed entranced by 
the camera. 'Well,' he said, 'they wasn't from around here. They was... dark.’ 


‘Dark?’ 


They now were tugging him down the steps, and he glanced back over his 
shoulder, as if sharing a confidence. ‘Arabs,’ he said. 


"You know.’ 


Liz Ocavello, behind her glasses and her big anchorwoman hairdo, accepted 
this disclosure so blandly that I thought I'd heard it wrong. Thank you, Mr 
Hundy,' she said, turning away, as Mr Hundy and his friends disappeared 
down the steps. This is Liz Ocavello at the Hampden County Courthouse.’ 


Thanks, Liz,' the newscaster said cheerily, swiveling in his chair. 
"Wait,' said Camilla. 'Did he say what I thought he said?’ 

"What?' 

‘Arabs? He said Bunny got in a car with some Arabs'?' 


In a related development,’ the anchorman said, 'area churches have joined 
hands in a prayer effort for the missing boy. According to Reverend A. K. 
Poole of First Lutheran, several churches in the tri-state area, including First 
Baptist, First Methodist, Blessed Sacrament and Assembly of God, have 
offered up their ' 


'I wonder what this mechanic of yours is up to, Henry,’ said Francis. 


Henry lit a cigarette. He had smoked it halfway down before he said: 'Did 
they ask you anything about Arabs, Charles?’ 


'No.' 


‘But they just said on television that Hundy's not dealing with the FBI,’ 
Camilla said. 


"We don't know that.’ 
"You don't think it's all some kind of setup?’ 
'I don't know what to think.’ 


The picture on the set had changed. A thin, well-groomed woman in her 
fifties — Chanel cardigan, pearls at the neckline, hair brushed into a stiff, 
shoulder-length flip — was talking, in a nasal voice which was oddly familiar. 


"Yes,' she said; where had I heard that voice before? The people of Hampden 
are ever so kind. When we arrived at our hotel, late yesterday afternoon, the 
concierge was waiting for —' 


‘Concierge,’ said Francis, disgusted. "They don't have a concierge at the 
Coachlight Inn. 


I studied this woman with new interest. 'That's Bunny's mother?’ 
‘That's right,’ said Henry. 'I keep forgetting. You haven't met her.’ 


She was a slight woman, corded and freckled around the neck the way 
women of that age and disposition often are; she bore little resemblance to 
Bunny but her hair and eyes were the same color as his and she had his nose: 
a tiny, sharp, inquisitive nose which harmonized perfectly with the rest of her 
features but had always looked slightly incongruous on Bunny, stuck as it was 
like an afterthought in the middle of his large, blunt face. Her manner was 
haughty and distracted. 'Oh,' she said, twisting a ring on her finger, 'we've had 
a deluge, indeed, from all over the country. 


Cards, calls, the most glorious flowers —' 

‘Do they have her doped up or something?’ I said. 
"What do you mean?’ 

"Well, she doesn't seem very upset, does she?’ 


‘Of course,’ said Mrs Corcoran reflectively, 'of course, we're all just out of 
our minds, really. And I certainly hope that no mother will ever have to 
endure what I have for the past few nights. But the weather does seem to be 
breaking, and we've met so many lovely people, and the local merchants have 
all been generous in so many little ways...’ 


‘Actually,’ said Henry, when the station cut to a commercial, ‘she 
photographs rather well, doesn't she?’ 


‘She looks like a tough customer. 

‘She's from Hell,’ Charles said drunkenly. 

‘Oh, she's not that bad,' said Francis. 

"You just say that because she kisses up to you all the time,' 

Charles said. ‘Because of your mother and stuff.’ 

"Kiss up? What are you talking about? Mrs Corcoran doesn't Wc. f up to me.' 


‘She's awful,’ Charles said. 'It's a horrible thing to tell your kids that money's 
the only thing in the world, but it's a disgrace to work for it. Then toss 'em out 
without a penny. She never gave Bunny one red —' 


"That's Mr Corcoran's fault, too,’ said Camilla. 


"Well, yeah, maybe. I don't know. I just never met such a bunch of greedy, 
shallow people. You look at them and think, oh, what a tasteful, attractive 
family but they're just a bunch of zeros, like something from an ad. They've 
got this room in their house,’ Charles said, turning to me, ‘called the Gucci 
Room.’ 


"What?’ 


"Well, they painted it with a dado, sort of, those awful Gucci stripes. It was in 
all kinds of magazines. Rouse Beautiful had it in some ridiculous article they 
did on Whimsy in Decorating or some absurd idea — you know, where they 
tell you to paint a giant lobster or something on your bedroom ceiling and it's 
supposed to be very witty and attractive.’ He lit a cigarette. 'I mean, that's 
exactly the kind of people they are,’ he said. 'All surface. Bunny was the best 
of them by a long shot but even he ' 


'I hate Gucci,’ said Francis. 


‘Do you?’ said Henry, glancing up from his reverie. 'Really? I think it's rather 
grand. 


‘Come on, Henry.’ 


"Well, it's so expensive, but it's so ugly too, isn't it? I think they make it ugly 
on purpose. And yet people buy it out of sheer perversity.’ 


'I don't see what you think is grand about that.’ 
‘Anything is grand if it's done on a large enough scale,’ said Henry. 


I was walking home that night, paying no attention to where I was going, 
when a large, sulky fellow approached me near the apple trees in front of 
Putnam House. He said: 'Are you Richard Papen?’ 


I stopped, looked at him, said that I was. 


To my astonishment, he punched me in the face, and I fell backwards in the 
snow with a thump that knocked me breathless. 


‘Stay away from Mona!’ he shouted at me. 'If you go near her again, I'll kill 
you. You understand me?’ 


Too stunned to reply, I stared up at him. He kicked me in the ribs, hard, and 
then trudged sullenly away — footsteps crunching through the snow, a 
slamming door. 


I looked up at the stars. They seemed very far away. Finally, I struggled to 
my feet — there was a sharp pain in my ribs, but nothing seemed broken — and 
limped home in the dark. 


I woke late the next morning. My eye hurt when I rolled on my cheek. I lay 
there for a while, blinking in the bright sun, as confused details of the 
previous night floated back to me like a dream; then I reached for my watch 
on the night table and saw that it was late, almost noon, and why had no one 
been by to get me? 


I got up, and as I did my reflection rose to meet me, head-on in the opposite 
mirror; it stopped and stared — hair on end, mouth agog in idiotic astonishment 
— like a comic book character konked on the head with an anvil, chaplet of 
stars and birdies twittering about the brow. Most startling of all, a splendid 
dark cartoon of a black eye was stamped in a ring on my eye socket, in the 
richest inks of Tyrian, chartreuse, and plum. 


I brushed my teeth, dressed, and hurried outside, where the first familiar 
person I spotted was Julian on his way up to the Lyceum. 


He drew back from me in innocent, Chaplinesque surprise. 
‘Goodness,’ he said, 'what happened to you?’ 
"Have you heard anything this morning?’ 


"Why, no,’ he said, looking at me curiously. 'That eye. You look as if you 


were in a barroom brawl.’ 


Any other time I would have been too embarrassed to tell him the truth, but 
The was so sick of lying that I had an urge to come clean, on this small matter 
at least. So I told him what had happened. 


I was surprised at his reaction. 'So it was a brawl,’ he said, with childish 
delight. 'How thrilling. Are you in love with her?’ 


T'm afraid I don't know her too well.’ 


He laughed. 'Dear me, you are being truthful today,’ he said, with remarkable 
perspicuity. 'Life has got awfully dramatic all of a sudden, hasn't it? Just like a 
fiction... By the way, did I tell you that some men came round to see me 
yesterday afternoon?’ 


"Who were they?’ 


"There were two of them. At first I was rather anxious — I thought they were 
from the State Department, or worse. You've heard of my problems with the 
Isrami government?’ 


I am not sure what Julian thought the Isrami government terrorist state 
though it is — should want to do with him, but his fear of it came from his 
having taught its exiled crown princess about ten years before. After the 
revolution she'd been forced into hiding, had ended up somehow at Hampden 
College; Julian taught her for four years, in private tutorials supervised by the 
former Isrami minister of education, who would occasionally fly in from 
Switzerland, with gifts of caviar and chocolates, to make sure that the 
curriculum was suitable for the heir apparent to his country's throne. 


The princess was fabulously rich. (Henry had caught a glimpse of her once — 
dark glasses, full-length marten coat — clicking rapidly down the stairs of the 
Lyceum with her bodyguards at her heels.) The dynasty to which she 
belonged traced its origins to the Tower of Babel, and had accumulated a 
monstrous amount of wealth since then, a good deal of which her surviving 
relatives and associates had managed to smuggle out of the country. 


But there was a price on her head, as a result of which she'd been isolated, 
overprotected, and largely friendless, even while a I teenager at Hampden. 
Subsequent years had made her a recluse. « She moved from place to place, 
terrified of assassins; her whole ™ family — except for a cousin or two and a 
little half-wit brother who was in an institution — had been picked off one by 
one over the years and even the old Minister of Education, six months after 
the princess was graduated from college, had died of a sniper's bullet, sitting 
in the garden of his own little red-roofed house in Montreux. 


Julian was uninvolved in Isrami politics despite his fondness for the princess 
and his sympathy — on principle — with royalists instead of revolutionaries. 
But he refused to travel by airplane or accept packages COD, lived in fear of 
unexpected visitors, and had not been abroad in eight or nine years. Whether 
these were reasonable precautions or excessive ones I do not know, but his 
connection with the princess did not seem a particularly strong one and I, for 
one, suspected that the Isramic jihad had better things to do than hunting 
down Classics tutors in New England. 


‘Of course, they weren't from the State Department at all but they were 
connected with the government in some way. I have a sixth sense about such 
things, isn't that curious? One of the men was an Italian, very charming, 
really... courtly, almost, in a funny sort of way. I was rather puzzled by it all. 
They said that Edmund was on drugs.’ 


"What?' 
‘Do you think that odd? I think it very odd.' 
"What did you say?’ 


'I said certainly not. I may be flattering myself, but I do think I know 
Edmund rather well. He's really quite timid, puritanical, almost... I can't 
imagine him doing anything of the sort and besides, young people who take 
drugs are always so bovine and prosaic. But do you know what this man said 
to me? He said that with young people, you can never tell. I don't think that's 
right, do you? Do you think that's right?’ 


We walked through Commons — I could hear the crash of plates overhead in 
the dining hall — and, on the pretext of having business on that end of campus, 
I walked on with Julian to the Lyceum. 


That part of school, on the North Hampden side, was usually peaceful and 
desolate, the snow trackless and undisturbed beneath the pines until spring. 
Now it was trampled and littered like a fairgrounds. Someone had run a Jeep 
into an elm tree broken glass, twisted fender, horrible splintered wound 
gaping yellow in the trunk; a foul-mouthed group of townie kids slid and 
shrieked down the hillside on a piece of cardboard. 


‘Goodness,’ said Julian, 'those poor children,’ I left him at the back door of 
the Lyceum and walked to Dr Roland's office. It was a Sunday, he wasn't 
there; I let myself in and locked the door behind me and spent the afternoon in 
happy seclusion: grading papers, drinking muddy drip coffee from a mug that 
said rhonda, and half-listening to the voices from down the hall. 


I have the idea that those voices were in fact audible, and that I could have 


understood what they were saying if I'd paid any attention, but I didn't. It was 
only later, after I'd left the office and forgotten all about them, that I learned 
whom they belonged to, and that maybe I hadn't been quite so safe that 
afternoon as I'd thought. 


The FBI men, said Henry, had set up a temporary headquarters in an empty 
classroom down the hall from Dr Roland's office, and that was where they 
talked to him. They hadn't been twenty feet from where I sat, were even 
drinking the same muddy coffee from the same pot I'd made in the teachers' 
lounge. 'That's odd,’ said Henry. 'The first thing I thought of when I tasted that 
coffee was you.’ 


"What do you mean?’ 
‘It tasted strange. Burnt. Like your coffee." 


The classroom (Henry said) had a blackboard covered with I quadratic 
equations, and two full ashtrays, and a long conference =, table at which the 
three of them sat. There was also a laptop ™ computer, a litigation bag with 
the FBI insignia in yellow, and a box of maple sugar candies — acorns, wee 
pilgrims, in fluted paper cups. They belonged to the Italian. 'For my kids," he 
said. 


Henry, of course, had done marvelously. He didn't say so, but then he didn't 
have to. He, in some senses, was the author of this drama and he had waited in 
the wings a long while for this moment, when he could step onto the stage and 
assume the role he'd written for himself: cool but friendly; hesitant; reticent 
with details; bright, but not as bright as he really was. He'd actually enjoyed 
talking to them, he told me. Davenport was a Philistine, not worth mentioning, 
but the Italian was somber and polite, quite charming. (‘Like one of those old 
Florentines Dante meets in Purgatory.") His name was Sciola. He was very 
interested in the trip to Rome, asked a lot of questions about it, not so much as 
investigator as fellow tourist. (‘Did you boys happen to go out to the, what do 
you call it, San Prassede, out there around the train station? With that little 
chapel out on the side?') He spoke Italian, too, and he and Henry had a brief 
and happy conversation which was cut short by the irritated Davenport, who 
didn't understand a word and wanted to get down to business. 


Henry was none too forthcoming, with me at least, about what that business 
actually was. But he did say that whatever track they were on, he was pretty 
sure it wasn't the right one. 


"What's more,’ he said, 'I think I've figured out what it is.’ 


"What?’ 


‘Cloke.’ 
They don't think Cloke killed him?' 


"They think Cloke knows more than he's telling. And they think his behavior 
is questionable. Which, as a matter of fact, it is. They know all kinds of things 
that I'm sure he didn't tell them.’ 


"Like what?’ 


'The logistics of his drug business. Dates, names, places. Things that 
happened before he even came to Hampden. And they seemed to be trying to 
tie some of it up with me, which of course they weren't able to do in any kind 
of satisfactory way. Goodness. 


They even asked about my prescriptions, painkillers I got from the infirmary 
my freshman year. There were file folders all over the place, data that no 
single person has access to — medical histories, psychological evaluations, 
faculty comments, work samples, grades... Of course, they made a point of 
letting me see they had all these things. Trying to intimidate me, I suppose. 


I know pretty much exactly what my records say, but Cloke's ... bad grades, 
drugs, suspensions — I'd be willing to bet he's left quite a little trail of paper 
behind him. I don't know if it's the records per se that have made them 
curious, or if it was something Cloke himself had said when he talked to 
them; but mostly what they wanted from me — and from Julian, and from 
Brady and Patrick Corcoran, to whom they spoke last night — were details of 
Bunny's association with Cloke. Julian, of course, didn't know anything about 
it. Brady and Patrick apparently told them plenty. 


And I did, too.' 
"What are you talking about?’ 


"Well, I mean, Brady and Patrick were out in the parking lot of the 
Coachlight Inn smoking pot with him night before last.’ 


‘But what did you tell them?’ 
"What Cloke told us. About the drug business in New York.’ 


I leaned back in my chair. 'Oh, my God,' I said. 'Are you sure you know what 
you're doing?’ 


‘Of course,’ said Henry serenely. 'It was what they wanted to hear. They'd 
been circling around it all afternoon, when finally I decided to let it slip, they 


pounced... I expect Cloke is in for an uncomfortable day or two but really, I 
think this is very fortunate for us. We couldn't have asked for anything better 
to keep them busy until the snow melts — and have you noticed how bright it's 
been the last couple of days? I think the roads are already starting to clear.’ 


My black eye was the source of much interest, speculation, and debate —1 
told Francis that the FBI men had done it just to watch his eyes get round — 
but not nearly so much as was an article in the Boston Herald. They'd sent a 
reporter up the day before, as had the New York Post and the New York Daily 
News, but the Herald reporter had scooped them all. 


DRUGS MAY BE INVOLVED IN VERMONT DISAPPEARANCE 


Federal agents investigating the April 24 disappearance of Edmund 
Corcoran, a twenty-four-year-old Hampden College student who has been the 
subject of an intensive manhunt in Vermont for the past three days, have 
found that the missing youth may have been involved with drugs. 


Federal authorities who searched Corcoran's room discovered drug 
paraphernalia and heavy cocaine residue. 


Though Corcoran had no known history of drug abuse, sources close to the 
boy say that the normally extroverted Corcoran had become moody and 
withdrawn in the months prior to the disappearance. (See 'What Your Child 
Won't Tell You,’ p .6.) 


We were puzzled by this account, though everyone else on campus seemed 
to know all about it. I got the story from Judy Poovey. 


"You know what it was they found in his room? It was, like, this mirror that 
belonged to Laura Stora. I bet everybody in Durbinstall has done coke off that 
thing. Really old, with little grooves carved in the side, Jack Teitelbaum used 
to call it the Snow Queen because you could always scrape up a line or two if 
you were desperate or something. And sure, I guess it's technically her mirror, 
but really it's kind of public property and she said she hadn't even seen it in 
about a million years, somebody took it from a living room in one of the new 
houses in March. 


Bram Guernsey said that Cloke said it wasn't in Bunny's room when he was 
there before, that the Feds had planted it, but then Bram said that Cloke 
thought this whole thing was some kind of a setup. A frame. Like in 
«Mission: Impossible,» he meant, or one of those paranoia books by Philip K. 
Dick. He told Bram he thought the Feebies had a hidden camera planted 
somewhere in Durbinstall, all this wild stuff. Bram says it's because Cloke is 
afraid to go to sleep and been up on crystal meth for forty-eight hours. He sits 
around in his room with the door locked and does lines and listens to this song 


by the Buffalo Springfield, over and over... you know that one? «Something's 
happening here... what it is ain't exactly clear...» It's weird. People get upset, 
all of a sudden they want to listen to old hippie garbage they would never 
listen to if they were in their right mind, when my cat died I had to go out and 
borrow all these Simon and Garfunkel records. 


Anyway.’ She lit a cigarette. 'How did I get off on this? Right, Laura's 
freaking out, somehow they traced the mirror to her and she's already on 
probation, you know, had to do all this community service last fall because 
Flipper Leach got in trouble and ratted on Laura and Jack Teitelbaum — oh, 
you remember all that stuff, don't you?’ 


'I never heard of Flipper Leach.’ 


‘Oh, you know Flipper. She's a bitch. Everybody calls her Flipper because 
she flipped over her dad's Volvo, like, four times freshman year.’ 


'I don't understand what this Flipper person has to do with this.’ 


"Well, she doesn't have anything to do with it, Richard, you're just like that 
guy in «Dragnet» that always wants the facts. It's just that Laura is freaking 
out, okay, and Student Services is threatening to call her parents unless she 
tells them how that mirror got in Bunny's room, which she doesn't even have a 
rucking clue, and, get this, those FBI men found out about the Ecstasy she had 
at Swing into Spring last week and they want her to give up the names. I said, 
«Laura, don't do it, it'll be just like that thing with Flipper and everybody'll 
hate you and you'll have to transfer to another school.» It's like Bram was 
saying —' 


"Where is Cloke now?! 
"That's what I was going to tell you if you'd shut up a minute. 


Nobody knows. He was really wigged out and asked if he could borrow 
Bram's car last night, to leave school, but this morning the car was back in the 
parking lot with the keys in it and nobody's seen him and he's not in his room 
and something weird is happening there, too, but for sure I don't know what it 
is... I just won't even do meth anymore. Heebiejeebieville. By the way, I've 
been meaning to ask you, what did you do to your eye?’ 


Back at Francis's with the twins — Henry was having lunch with the 
Corcorans — I told them what Judy had told me. 


‘But I know that mirror,’ said Camilla. 


‘I do, too,’ said Francis. 'Spotty old dark one. Bunny's had it in his room for a 


while.’ 
'I thought it was his.’ 
'I wonder how he got hold of it.’ 


‘Tf the girl left it in a living room,' said Charles, ‘he probably just found it and 
took it.' 


This was highly probable. Bunny had had a mild tendency towards 
kleptomania, and was apt to pocket any small, valueless articles that caught 
his eye — nail clippers, buttons, spools of tape. 


These he hid around his room in jumbled little nests. It was a vice he 
practiced in secret, but at the same time he had felt no compunction about 
quite openly carrying away objects of greater value which he found 
unattended. He did this with such assurance and authority — tucking bottles of 
liquor or unguarded boxes I from the florist under his arm and walking away 
without a backwards glance — that I wondered if he knew it was stealing. I 
once heard him explaining vigorously and quite unselfconsciously to Marion 
what he thought ought to be done to people who stole food from house 
refrigerators. 


As bad as things were for Laura Stora, they were worse for the luckless 
Cloke. We were to discover later that he had not brought Bram Guernsey's car 
back of his own volition, but had been impelled to do so by the FBI agents, 
who had had him pulled over before he was ten miles out of Hampden. They 
took him back to the classroom where they had set up headquarters, and kept 
him there for most of Sunday night, and while I don't know what they said to 
him, I do know that by Monday morning he had requested to have an attorney 
present at the interview. 


Mrs Corcoran (said Henry) was burned up that anyone had dared suggest 
Bunny was on drugs. At lunch at the Brasserie, a reporter had edged up to the 
Corcoran table to ask if they had any comment to make about the ‘drug 
paraphernalia’ found in Bunny's room. 


Mr Corcoran, startled, had lowered his eyebrows impressively and said, 
"Well, of course, haw, ahem,’ but Mrs Corcoran, sawing at her steak au poivre 
with subdued violence, launched without even looking up into a tart diatribe. 
Drug paraphernalia, as they chose to call it, was not drugs, and it was a pity 
the press chose to level accusations at persons not present to defend 
themselves, and she was having a hard enough time as it was without having 
strangers imply that her son was a drug kingpin. All of which was more or 
less reasonable and true, and which the Post reported dutifully the next day 
word for word, alongside an unflattering picture of Mrs Corcoran with her 


mouth open and a headline which read: mom sez: not my kid. 


On Monday night, about two in the morning, Camilla asked me to walk her 
home from Francis's. Henry had left around midnight; and Francis and 
Charles, who'd been drinking hard since four o'clock, showed no signs of 
slowing down. They were entrenched in Francis's kitchen with the lights 
turned out, preparing, with what I felt was alarming hilarity, a series of 
hazardous cocktails called ‘Blue Blazers' which involved ignited whiskey 
poured back and forth in a flaming arc between two pewter mugs. 


At her apartment Camilla — shivering, preoccupied, her cheeks fever-red 
from the cold — asked me upstairs for a cup of tea. 'I wonder if we should have 
left them there,’ she said, switching on the lamp. T'm afraid they're going to 
set themselves on fire.’ 


"They'll be all right,’ I said, though the same thought had occurred to me. 


We drank our tea. The lamplight was warm and the apartment still and snug. 
At home in bed, in my private abyss of longing, the scenes I dreamed of 
always began like this: drowsy drunken hour, the two of us alone, scenarios in 
which invariably she would brush against me as if by chance, or lean 
conveniently close, cheek touching mine, to point out a passage in a book; 
opportunities which I would seize, gently but manfully, as exordium to more 
violent pleasures. 


The teacup was too hot; it burned my fingertips. I set it down and looked at 
her — oblivious, smoking a cigarette, scarcely two feet away. I could lose 
myself forever in that singular little face, in the pessimism of her beautiful 
mouth. Come here, you. Let's shut the light out, shall we? When I imagined 
these phrases cast in her voice, they were almost intolerably sweet; now, 
sitting right beside her, it was unthinkable that I should voice them myself. 


And yet: why should it be? She had been party to the killing of two men; had 
stood calm as a Madonna and watched Bunny die. I remembered Henry's cool 
voice, scarcely six weeks earlier. There was a certain carnal dement to the 
proceedings, yes. 


‘Camilla?’ I said. 
She glanced up, distracted. 
"What really happened, that night in the woods?’ 


I think I had been expecting, if not surprise, at least a show of it. But she 
didn't blink. "Well, I don't remember an awful lot,’ she said slowly. ‘And what 
I do remember is almost impossible to describe. It's all much less clear than it 


was even a few months ago. I suppose I should have tried to write it down or 
something.’ 


‘But what do you remember?’ 


It was a moment before she answered. "Well, I'm sure you've heard it all 
from Henry,' she said. 'It seems a bit silly to even say it aloud. I remember a 
pack of dogs. Snakes twining around my arms. Trees on fire, pines bursting 
into flames like enormous torches. There was a fifth person with us for part of 
the time. 


‘A fifth person?’ 
‘It wasn't always a person.’ 
'I don't know what you mean.’ 


"You know what the Greeks called Dionysus. no Xveidri*. The Many- 
Formed One. Sometimes it was a man, sometimes a woman. And sometimes 
something else. I — I'll tell you something that I do remember,’ she said 
abruptly. 


"What?' I said, hopeful at last for some passionate, back-clawing detail. 


"That dead man. Lying on the ground. His stomach was torn open and steam 
was coming out of it.’ 


'His stomach»!' 


Tt was a cold night. I'll never forget the smell of it, either. Like when my 
uncle used to cut up deer. Ask Francis. He remembers, too.' 


I was too horrified to say anything. She reached for the teapot and poured a 
bit more into her cup. 'Do you know, she said, 'why I think we're having such 
bad luck this time around?’ 


"What?’ 


‘Because it's terrible luck to leave a body unburied. That farmer they found 
straightaway, you know. But remember poor I Palinurus in the Aeneid~> He 
lingered around and haunted them ^^^ for the longest time. I'm afraid that 
none of us are going to have ^B a good night's sleep until Bunny's in the 
ground.’ 


That's nonsense.’ 


She laughed. 'In the fourth century b. c., the sailing of the entire Attic fleet 


was delayed just because a soldier sneezed.’ 
"You've been talking too much to Henry.’ 


She was silent for a moment. Then she said: 'Do you know what Henry made 
us do, a couple of days after that thing in the woods?’ 


"What?' 
"He made us kill a piglet.’ 


I was not shocked so much by this statement as by the eerie calm with which 
she delivered it. 'Oh, my God,' I said. 


"We cut its throat. Then we took turns holding it over each other, so it bled 
on our heads and hands. It was awful. I nearly got sick." 


It seemed to me that the wisdom of deliberately covering oneself with blood 
— even pig blood — immediately after committing a murder was questionable, 
but all I said was: 'Why did he want to do that?’ 


"Murder is pollution. The murderer defiles everyone he comes into contact 
with. And the only way to purify blood is through blood. We let the pig bleed 
on us. Then we went inside and washed it off. After that, we were okay.’ 


‘Are you trying to tell me,' I said, 'that ' 


‘Oh, don't worry,’ she said hastily. 'I don't think he plans on doing anything 
like that this time. 


"Why? Didn't it work?' 


She failed to catch the sarcasm of this. 'Oh, no,' she said. 'I think it worked, 
all right.’ 


‘Then why not do it again?’ 
‘Because I think Henry has got the idea that it might upset you.’ 


There was the fumble of a key in the lock, and a few moments later Charles 
plunged through the door. He shouldered his coat off and let it fall in a heap 
on the rug. 


‘Hello, hello,’ he sang, lurching inside and shedding his jacket in the same 
fashion. He had not come into the living room, but made an abrupt turn into 
the hallway which led to bedrooms and bath. A door opened, then another. 
"Milly, my girl,’ I heard him call. 'Where are you, honey?’ 


‘Oh, dear,' said Camilla. Out loud, she said: 'We're in here, Charles.’ 


Charles reappeared. His tie was now loosened and his hair was wild. 
‘Camilla,’ he said, leaning against the doorframe, 'Camilla,' and then he saw 
me. 


"You,' he said, not too politely. "What are you doing here?’ 

"We're just having some tea,’ said Camilla. "Would you like some?’ 
"No.' He turned and disappeared into the hall again. "Too late. 
Going to bed.' 

A door slammed. Camilla and I looked at each other. I stood up. 
"Well,' I said, ‘better be heading home.’ 


There were still search parties, but the number of participating townspeople 
had shrunk dramatically, and almost no students remained at all. The 
operation had turned tight, secretive, professional. 


I heard the police had brought in a psychic, a fingerprint expert, a special 
team of bloodhounds trained at Dannemora. 


Perhaps because I imagined that I was tainted with a secret pollution, 
imperceptible to most but perhaps discernible to the nose of a dog (in movies, 
the dog is always the first to know the suave and unsuspected vampire for 
what it is), the thought of the bloodhounds made me superstitious and I tried 
to stay as far away from dogs as I could, all dogs, even the dopey Labrador 
mutts who belonged to the ceramics teacher and were always r running around 
with their tongues hanging out, looking for a j IB game of Frisbee. Henry — 
imagining, perhaps, some trembling Kassandra gibbering prophecies to a 
chorus of policemen — was far more concerned about the psychic. 'If they're 
going to find us out,’ he said, with glum certainty, ‘that's how it's going to 
happen. 


‘Certainly you don't believe in that stuff.’ 
He gave me a look of indescribable contempt. 
"You amaze me,' he said. "You think nothing exists if you can't see it.' 


The psychic was a young mother from upstate New York. An electrical 
shock from some jumper cables had put her into a coma from which she 
emerged, three weeks later, able to ‘know’ things by handling an object or 
touching a stranger's hand. The police had used her successfully in a number 


of missing-person cases. Once she had found the body of a strangled child by 
merely pointing to an area on a surveyor's map. Henry, who was so 
superstitious that he sometimes left a saucer of milk outside his door to 
appease any malevolent spirits who might happen to wander by, watched her, 
fascinated, as she walked alone on the edge of campus — thick glasses, 
suburban car coat, red hair tied up in a polka-dot scarf. 


‘It's unfortunate,’ he said. 'I don't dare risk meeting her. But I should like to 
talk to her very much.' 


The majority of our classmates, however, were thrown into an uproar by the 
information — accurate or not, I still don't know — that the Drug Enforcement 
Agency had brought in agents and was conducting an undercover 
investigation. Theophile Gautier, writing about the effect of Vigny's 
Chatterton on the youth of Paris, said that in the nineteenth-century night one 
could practically hear the crack of the solitary pistols: here, now, in Hampden, 
the night was alive with the flushing of toilets. Pillheads, cokeheads staggered 
around glassy-eyed, dazed at their sudden losses. Someone flushed so much 
pot down one of the toilets in the sculpture studio they had to get somebody in 
from the Water Department to dig up the septic tank. 


About four-thirty on Monday afternoon, Charles showed up at my room. 
‘Hello,’ he said. 'Want to get something to eat?’ 


"Where's Camilla?’ 


‘Somewhere, I don't know,’ he said, his pale glance skittering across my 
room. 'Do you want to come?’ 


"Well... sure,’ I said. 
He brightened. 'Good. I've got a taxi downstairs.’ 


The taxi driver — a florid man named Junior who'd driven Bunny and me into 
town that first fall afternoon, and who in three days would be driving Bunny 
back to Connecticut for the last time, this time in a hearse — looked back at us 
in the rear-view mirror as we pulled out onto College Drive. 'You boys going 
to the Brassiere?' he said. 


He meant the Brasserie. It was the little joke he always had with us. 'Yes,' I 
said. 


'No,' said Charles quite suddenly. He was slouched down childishly low 
against the door, staring straight ahead and drumming on the armrest with his 
fingers. 'We want to go to 1910 Catamount Street.’ 


"Where's that?’ I said to him. 


‘Oh, I hope you don't mind,’ he said, almost looking at me but not quite. ‘Just 
feel like a change. It's not far and besides, I'm sick of the food at the Brasserie, 
aren't you?’ 


The place where we wound up — a bar called the Farmer's Inn was not 
remarkable for its food, or its decor — folding chairs and Formica tables — or 
for its sparse clientele, which was mostly rural, drunken, and over sixty-five. 
It was, in fact, inferior to the Brasserie in every respect but one, which was 
that really very sizable shots of off-brand whiskey could be got at the bar for 
fifty cents each. 


We sat at the end of the bar by the television set. A basketball game was on. 
The barmaid — in her fifties, with turquoise eye shadow and lots of turquoise 
rings to match — looked us over, our suits and ties. She seemed startled by 
Charles's order of two double whiskeys and a club sandwich. 'What the hey,’ 
she said, in a voice like a macaw. "They're letting you boys have a snort now 
and then, huh?’ 


I didn't know what she meant — was this some dig at our clothes, at Hampden 
College, did she want to see our IDs? 


Charles, who only the moment before had been sunk in gloom, glanced up 
and fixed her with a smile of great warmth and sweetness. He had a way with 
waitresses. They always hovered over him in restaurants and went to all kinds 
of special trouble on his behalf. 


This one looked at him — pleased, incredulous — and barked with laughter. 
"Well, ain't that a kick,’ she said hoarsely, reaching with a heavily ringed hand 
for the Silva-Thin burning in the ashtray beside her. 'And here I thought you 
Mormon kids that went around wasn't even suppose to drink Coca-Cola.’ 


As soon as she sauntered back to the kitchen to turn in our order (‘Bill!’ we 
heard her saying, behind the swinging doors. 


‘Hey, Bill! Listen to this!'), the smile faded from Charles's face. 


He reached for his drink and offered a humorless shrug when I tried to catch 
his eye. 


‘Sorry,’ he said. 'I hope you don't mind coming here. It's cheaper than the 
Brasserie and we won't see anybody.’ 


He was not in a mood to talk — ebullient sometimes, he could also be as mute 
and sulky as a child — and he drank steadily, with both his elbows on the bar 


and his hair falling down in his face. 


When his sandwich came he picked it apart, ate the bacon and left the rest, 
while I drank my drink and watched the Lakers. It was weird to be there, in 
that clammy dark bar in Vermont, and watching them play. Back in 
California, at my old college, they'd had a pub called Falstaff's with a wide- 
screen television; I'd had a dopey friend named Carl who used to drag me 
there to drink dollar beer and watch basketball. He was probably there now. 
on a redwood bar stool, watching this exact game. 


I was thinking these depressing thoughts and others like them, and Charles 
was on his fourth or fifth whiskey when somebody started switching the 
television with a remote control: 'Jeopardy,' 


"Wheel of Fortune,’ 
"Mac Neil,'Lehrer,' at last a local talk show. 


It was called "Tonight in Vermont.' The set was styled after a New England 
farmhouse, with mock Shaker furniture and antique farm equipment, 
pitchforks and so forth, hanging from the clapboard backdrop. Liz Ocavello 
was the host. In imitation of Oprah and Phil, she had a question-and-answer 
period at the end of each show, generally not too lively since her guests 
tended to be pretty tame — the State Commissioner for Veterans’ Affairs, 
Shriners announcing a blood drive (‘What's that address again, Joe?’). 


Her guest that evening, though it was several moments before I realized it, 
was William Hundy. He had on a suit — not the blue leisure suit but an old one 
the likes of which a rural preacher might wear — and he was talking 
authoritatively, for some reason I did not immediately understand, about 
Arabs and OPEC. That OPEC,’ he said, 'is the reason we don't have Texaco 
filling stations anymore. I remember when I was a boy it was Texaco stations 
all over the place but these Arabs, it was some kind of, what you call, leverage 
buyout ' 


Look,’ I said to Charles, but by the time I'd got him to glance up from his 
stupor they'd switched back to Jeopardy.’ 


'What?' he said. 
"Nothing. 
‘Jeopardy,' 


"Wheel of Fortune,’ back to 'Mac Neil,'Lehrer' for kind of a long time until 
someone yelled, "Turn that shit off, Dotty.’ 


"Well, what you want to watch, then?’ 
' «Wheel of Fortune,"’ shouted a hoarse chorus. 


But 'Wheel of Fortune’ was going off the air (Vanna blowing a glittery kiss) 
and the next thing I knew we were back in the simulated farmhouse with 
William Hundy. He was talking now about his appearance the previous 
morning on the 'Today' show. 


Look,’ said someone, 'there's that guy runs Redeemed Repair.’ 
‘He don't run it.' 

"Who does, then?’ 

"Him and Bud Alcorn both do.' 

‘Aw, shut up, Bobby.’ 


‘Naw,’ said Mr Hundy, ‘didn't see Willard Scott. Reckon I wouldn't have 
known what to say if I had. It's a big operation they got there, course it don't 
look so big on the TV.’ 


I kicked Charles's foot. 


"Yeah,' he said, without interest, and brought his glass up with an unsteady 
hand. 


1 was surprised to see how outspoken Mr Hundy had become in just four 
days. I was even more surprised to see how warmly the studio audience 
responded to him — asking concerned questions on topics ranging from the 
criminal justice system to the role of the small businessman in the community, 
roaring with laughter at his feeble jokes. It seemed to me that such popularity 
could only be incidental to what he had seen, or claimed to see. 


His stunned and stuttering air was gone. Now, with his hands folded over his 
stomach, answering questions with the pacific smile of a pontiff granting 
dispensations, he was so perfectly at his ease that there was something 
palpably dishonest about it. I wondered why no one else, apparently, could 
see it. 


A small, dark man in shirtsleeves, who had been waving his hand in the air 
for some time, was finally called upon by Liz and stood up. 'My name is 
Adnan Nassar and I am Palestinian American,’ he said in a rush. 'I came to 
this country from Syria nine years ago and have since then earned American 
citizenship and am assistant manager of the Pizza Pad on Highway 6.' 


Mr Hundy put his head to the side. 'Well, Adnan,’ he said cordially, 'I expect 
that story would be pretty unusual in your own country. But here, that's the 
way the system works. For everybody. And that's regardless of your race or 
the color of your skin.’ Applause. 


Liz, microphone in hand, made her way down the aisle and pointed at a lady 
with a bouffant hairdo, but the Palestinian angrily waved his arms and the 
camera shifted back to him. 


That is not the point,’ he said. 'I am an Arab and I resent the racial slurs you 
make against my people.’ 


Liz walked back to the Palestinian and put her hand on his arm, Oprah-style, 
to comfort him. William Hundy, sitting in his mock-Shaker chair on the 
podium, shifted slightly as he leaned forward. 'You like it here?’ he said 
shortly. 


"Yes.' 

"You want to go back?’ 

'Now,' Liz said loudly. 'Nobody is trying to say that ' 

"Because the boats,’ said Mr Hundy, even louder, 'run both ways.’ 


Dotty, the barmaid, laughed admiringly and took a drag off her cigarette. 
‘That's telling him,’ she said. 


"Where your family comes from?’ said the Arab sarcastically. 
"You American Indian or what?’ 


Mr Hundy did not appear to have heard this. TIl pay for you to go back,’ he 
said. 'How much is a one-way ticket to Baghdad going for these days? If you 
want me to, I'll' 


'I think,’ Liz said hastily, 'that you've misunderstood what this gentleman is 
trying to say. He's just trying to make the point that —' She put her arm around 
the Palestinian's shoulders and he threw it off in a rage. 


‘All night long you say offensive things about Arabs,’ he screamed. 'You 
don't know what Arab is.' He beat on his chest with his fist. 'I know it, in my 
heart.’ 


"You and your buddy Saddam Hussein. 


"How dare you say we are all greedy, driving big cars? This is very offensive 


to me. I am Arabic and I conserve the natural resource ' 
‘By setting fire to all them oil wells, eh?’ 
'-by driving a Toyota Corolla.' 


'I wasn't talking about you in particular,’ said Hundy. «I was talking about 
them OPEC creepos and them sick people kidnapped that boy. You think 
they're driving around in Toyota Corollas? You think we condone terrorism 
here? Is that what they do in your country?’ 


"You lie,’ shouted the Arab. 


For a moment, in confusion, the camera went to Liz Ocavello; she was 
staring, without seeing, right out of the screen and I knew she was thinking 
exactly what I was thinking, oh, boy, oh, boy, here it comes... 


‘Tt ain't a lie,’ said Hundy hotly. 'I know. I been in the service station business 
for thirty years. You think I don't remember, when Carter was President, you 
had us over such a barrel, back in nineteen and seventy-five? And now all you 
people coming over here, acting like you own the place, with all your chick 
peas and your filthy little pocket breads?’ 


Liz was looking to the side, trying to mouth instructions. 
The Arab screamed out a frightful obscenity. 
"Hold it! Stop!’ shouted Liz Ocavello in despair. 


Mr Hundy leapt to his feet, eyes blazing, pointing a trembling forefinger into 
the audience. 'Sand niggers!’ he shouted bitterly. ‘Sand niggers.’ Sand ' 


The camera jerked away and panned wildly to the side of the set, a tangle of 
black cables, hooded lights. It wavered in and out of focus and then, with a 
jerk, a commercial for Mc Donald's came on the screen. 


"Whooo-hoo,' someone shouted appreciatively. 
There was scattered clapping. 
‘Did you hear that?’ said Charles, after a pause. 


I had forgotten all about him. His voice was slurred and his hair fell sweaty 
across his forehead. 'Be careful,’ 1 said to him in Greek, and nodded towards 
the barmaid. 'She can hear you.' 


He mumbled something, wobbling on his bar stool, all padded glitter-vinyl 


and chrome. 
‘Let's go. It's late,' I said, fumbling in my pocket for money. 


Unsteadily, his gaze locked on mine, he leaned over and caught hold of my 
wrist. The light from the jukebox caught and glinted in his eyes, making them 
strange, crazed, the luminous killer eyes that sometimes glow unexpectedly 
from a friend's face in a snapshot. 


‘Shut up, old man,’ he said. 'Listen.' 


I pulled my hand away and swung round on the stool but just as I did it I 
heard a long, dry rumble. Thunder. 


We looked at each other. 
‘It's raining,’ he whispered. 


All that night it fell, warm rain, dripping from the eaves and pattering at my 
window, while I lay flat on my back with my eyes wide open, listening. 


All that night it rained and all the next morning: warm, gray, coming down 
soft and steady as a dream. 


When I woke up I knew they were going to find him that day, knew it in my 
stomach from the moment I looked out my window at the snow, rotten and 
pocky, patches of slimy grass and everywhere drip drip drip. 


It was one of those mysterious, oppressive days we sometimes had at 
Hampden, where the mountains that lowered at the horizon were swallowed 
up in fog and the world seemed light and empty, dangerous somehow. 
Walking around campus, the wet grass squishing beneath your feet, you felt as 
if you were in Olympus, Valhalla, some old abandoned land above the clouds; 
the landmarks that you knew — clocktower, houses — floating up 413 like 
memories from a former life, isolated and disconnected in the mist. 


Drizzle and damp. Commons smelled like wet clothes, everything dark and 
subdued. I found Henry and Camilla upstairs at a table by the window, a full 
ashtray between them, Camilla with her chin propped in her hand and a 
cigarette burning low between her ink-stained fingers. 


The main dining room was on the second floor, in a modern addition that 
jutted over a loading dock in the back. Huge, rain-splashed panes of glass — 
tinted gray, so they made the day seem drearier than it was — walled us in on 
three sides and we had a prime view of the loading dock itself, where the 
butter and egg trucks pulled up early in the morning, and of the slick black 


road that wound through the trees and disappeared in the mist in the direction 
of North Hampden. 


There was tomato soup for lunch, coffee with skim milk because they were 
out of plain. Rain pittered against the plate glass windows. Henry was 
distracted. The FBI had paid him another visit the night before — what they 
wanted he didn't say — and he was talking on and on in a low voice about 
Schliemann's Ilios, the fingertips of his big square hands poised on the table's 
edge as if it were a Ouija board. When I'd lived with him over the winter, he 
would sometimes go on for hours in these didactic monologues, reeling off a 
pedantic and astonishingly accurate torrent of knowledge with the slow, 
transfixed calm of a subject under hypnosis. He was talking about the 
excavation of Hissarlik: 'a terrible place, a cursed place,’ he said dreamily — 
cities and cities buried beneath each other, cities torn down, cities burnt and 
their bricks melted to glass... a terrible place, he said absently, a cursed place, 
nests of tiny brown adders of the sort that the Greeks call antelion and 
thousands and thousands of little owl-headed death gods (goddesses, really, 
some hideous prototype of Athena) staring fanatical and rigid from the 
engraved illustrations. 


1 didn't know where Francis was, but there was no need to ask about 
Charles. The night before I'd had to bring him home in a taxi, help him 
upstairs and into bed, where, judging from the condition in which I'd left him, 
he still was now. Two cream cheese and marmalade sandwiches lay wrapped 
in napkins by Camilla’s plate. She hadn't been there when I brought Charles 
home, and she looked like she'd just got out of bed herself: tousle-haired, no 
lipstick, wearing a gray wool sweater that came down past her wrists. Smoke 
drifted from her cigarette in wisps that were the color of the sky outside. A 
tiny white speck of a car came singing down the wet road from town, far 
away, twisting with the black curves and growing larger by the moment. 


It was late. Lunch was over, people were leaving. A misshapen old janitor 
trudged in with mop and pail and began, with weary grunting noises, to slop 
water on the floor by the beverage center. 


Camilla was staring out the window. Suddenly, her eyes got wide. Slowly, 
incredulously, she raised her head; and then she was scrambling out of her 
chair, craning to see. 


I saw, too, and jumped forward. An ambulance was parked directly beneath 
us. Two attendants, pursued by a pack of photographers, hurried past with 
their heads bent against the rain and a stretcher between them. The form upon 
it was covered with a sheet but, just before they shoved it through the double 
doors (long, easy motion, like bread sliding into the oven) and slammed them 
shut, I saw, hanging down from the edge, five or six inches of yellow rain 


slicker. 


Shouts, far away, downstairs in Commons; doors slamming, a growing 
confusion, voices shouting down voices and then one hoarse voice, rising 
above the others: 'Is he living?’ 


Henry took a deep breath. Then he closed his eyes; and exhaling sharply, a 
hand to his chest, he fell back in his chair as if he'd been shot. 


This is what happened. 


At about one-thirty on Tuesday afternoon, Holly Goldsmith, an eighteen- 
year-old freshman from Taos, New Mexico, decided to take her golden 
retriever, Milo, for a walk. 


Holly, who studied modern dance, knew of the search for Bunny but like 
most students of her year had not participated in it, taking advantage of the 
unexpected recess to catch up on sleep and study for midterms. Quite 
understandably, she did not wish to run into a search party while on her 
outing. Therefore she decided to take Milo out behind the tennis courts to the 
ravine, since it had been canvassed days before and was, besides, a spot of 
which the dog was especially fond. 


This is what Holly said: 'When we were out of sight of campus, I unhooked 
Milo's leash so he could run around by himself. He likes to do that... 


'So I was just standing there at the edge of the ravine waiting for him. He'd 
scrambled over the embankment and was running around and barking, usual 
stuff. I'd forgot his tennis ball that day. 


I thought it was in my pocket but it wasn't, so I went off and found a few 
sticks to throw to him. When I came back to the edge of the embankment, I 
saw he had something in his teeth, shaking it from side to side. He wouldn't 
come when I called him. I thought he had a rabbit or something... 


IT guess Milo had dug him up, his head and his, um, chest, I guess — I 
couldn't see very well. It was the glasses I noticed... slipped off one °ar and 
kind of flopping back and forth like... yes, please... licking his face... I 
thought for a moment he was...' unintelligible, 


The three of us went rapidly downstairs (gaping janitor, cooks peeping from 
the kitchen, the cafeteria ladies in their nurse cardigans leaning over the 
balustrade) past the snack bar, past the post office where for once the red- 
wigged lady at the switchboard had put aside her afghan and her bag of 
variegated yarns and was standing in the doorway, crumpled Kleenex in hand, 
following us curiously with her eyes as we rushed through the hall and into 


the main room of Commons, where stood a cluster of grim-looking 
policemen, the sheriff, the game warden, security guards, a strange girl crying 
and someone taking pictures and everybody talking at once until someone 
looked up at us and shouted: 'Hey! You! Didn't you know the boy?’ 


Flashbulbs went off everywhere and there was a riot of microphones and 
camcorders in our faces. 


"How long had you known him?’ 
'... drug-related incident?’ 
",.. traveled across Europe, is that right?’ 


Henry passed a hand over his face; I'll never forget the way he looked, white 
as talc, beads of sweat on his upper lip and the light bouncing off his 
glasses... 'Leave me alone,’ he muttered, seizing Camilla by the wrist and 
trying to push through to the door. 


They crowded forward to block his path. 
",.. care to comment...?' 
"... best friends?’ 


The black snout of a camcorder was thrust in his face. With a sweep of his 
arm Henry knocked it away and it fell on the floor with a loud crack, batteries 
rolling in all directions. The owner a fat man in a Mets cap — shrieked, 
stooped partway to the floor in consternation, then sprang up, cursing, as if to 
grab the retreating Henry by the collar. His ringers brushed the back of 
Henry's jacket and Henry turned, surprisingly quick. 


The man shrank. It was funny, but people never seemed to notice at first 
glance how big Henry was. Maybe it was because of his clothes, which were 
like one of those lame but curiously impenetrable disguises from a comic 
book (why does no one ever see that 'bookish' Clark Kent, without his glasses, 
is Superman”). 


Or maybe it was a question of his making people see. He had the far more 
remarkable talent of making himself invisible 417 in a room, in a car, a virtual 
ability to dematerialize at will — and perhaps this gift was only the converse of 
that one: the sudden concentration of his wandering molecules rendering his 
shadowy form solid, all at once, a metamorphosis startling to the viewer. 


The ambulance had gone. The roads stretched out slick and empty in the 
drizzle. Agent Davenport was hurrying up the steps to Commons, head down, 


black shoes slapping on the wet marble. When he saw us, he stopped. Sciola, 
behind him, climbed laboriously up the last two or three steps, bracing his 
knee with his palm. He stood behind Davenport and regarded us for a 
moment, breathing hard. 'I'm sorry,' he said. 


An airplane went by overhead, invisible above the clouds. 

‘He is dead, then,' said Henry. 

‘Afraid so. 

The buzz of the airplane receded in the damp, windy distance. 


"Where was he?' said Henry at last. He was pale, pale and sweaty at the 
temples but perfectly composed. There was a flat sound in his voice. 


In the woods,' said Davenport. 


‘Not far,’ Sciola said, rubbing with a knuckle at his pouchy eye. ‘Haifa mile 
from here.' 


"Were you there?’ 
Sciola stopped rubbing his eye. 'What?' 
"Were you there when they found him?’ 


"We were at the Blue Ben having some lunch,’ said Davenport briskly. He 
was breathing heavily through the nostrils and his ginger brush cut was 
beaded with droplets of condensed mist. 


"We went down for a look. Right now we're on the way to see the family.’ 
‘Don't they know?’ said Camilla, after a shocked pause. 


‘It's not that,’ said Sciola. He was patting his chest, fumbling gently with long 
yellow fingers in the pocket of his overcoat. 


"We're taking them a release form. We'd like to send him down I to the lab in 
Newark, have some tests run. Cases like this, though’ — his hand closed upon 
something, very slowly he drew out a crumpled pack of Pall Malls — 'cases 
like this, it's hard to get the family to sign. Can't say I blame them. These folks 
have been waiting around a week already, the family's all together, they're 
going to want to go ahead and bury him and get it over with "What happened?’ 
said Henry. 'Do you know?’ 


Sciola rummaged for a light, found it, got his cigarette lit after two or three 


tries. 'Hard to say,’ he said, letting the match fall, still burning, from his 
fingers. 'He was at the bottom of a drop-off with a broken neck. 


"You don't think he might have killed himself?’ 


Sciola's expression did not change, but a wisp of smoke curled from his 
nostrils in a manner subtly indicative of surprise. 'Why do you say that?’ 


"Because someone inside said it just now. 


He glanced over at Davenport. 'I wouldn't pay any attention to these people, 
son,’ he said. 'I don't know what the police are going to find, and it's going to 
be their decision, you understand, but I don't think they'll rule it a suicide.’ 


‘Why?’ 


He blinked at us placidly, his eyes balled and heavy-lidded like a tortoise's. 
There's no indication of it,' he said. "That I'm aware. 


The sheriff thinks maybe he was out there, he wasn't dressed warm enough, 
the weather got bad and maybe he was just in too big of a hurry to get 
home...’ 


‘And they don't know for sure,’ said Davenport, ‘but it looks like he might've 
been drinking.’ 


Sciola made a weary, Italianate gesture of resignation. 'Even if he wasn't,’ he 
said. 'The ground was muddy. It was raining. It could've been dark for all we 
know.' 


Nobody said anything for several long moments. 

"Look, son,’ said Sciola, not unkindly. ‘It's just my opinion, but if you ask me, 
your friend didn't kill himself. I saw the place he went over. The brush at the 
edge was all, you know —' He made a feeble, flicking gesture at the air. 


Torn up,' said Davenport brusquely. 'Dirt under his nails. 


When that kid went down he was grabbing at anything he could get ahold 
of.' 


"Nobody's trying to say how it happened,’ said Sciola. Tm just saying, don't 
believe everything you hear. That's a dangerous place up there, they ought to 
fence it off or something... Maybe you'd better sit down a minute, you think, 
honey?’ he said to Camilla, who was looking a bit green. 


"The college is going to get stuck either way,’ said Davenport. 


‘From the way that lady in Student Services was talking I can already see 
them trying to dodge liability. If he got drunk at that -ft college party... There 
was a Suit like this up in Nashua, where I'm * I from, about two years ago. A 
kid got drunk at some fraternity party, passed out in a snowbank, they didn't 
find him till the plows came through. I guess it all depends on how drunk they 
were and where they got their last drink but even if he wasn't drunk it looks 
pretty bad for the college, doesn't it? Kid's off at school, he has an accident 
like this right on the campus? All due respect to the parents, but I've met 
them, and they're the type's gonna sue. 


"How do you think it happened?’ said Henry to Sciola. 


This line of questioning did not seem to me to be a wise one, especially here, 
now, but Sciola grinned, a gaunt, toothy expanse, like an old dog or an 
opossum — too many teeth, discolored, stained. The?' he said. 


'Yes.' 


He didn't say anything for a moment, just took a drag of his cigarette and 
nodded. ‘It doesn't make any difference what I think, son,' he said after a 
pause. 'This isn't a federal case.’ 


"What?' 
"He means it's not a federal case,’ Davenport said sharply. 


‘There's no federal offense committed here. It's for the local cops to decide. 
The reason they called us up here in the first place was because of that nut, 
you know, from the gas station, and he didn't have anything to Jo with it. D. 
C. faxed us a lot of information on him before we came. You want to know 
what kind of a nut he is? He used to send all this crank mail to Anwar Sadat in 
the 19705. Ex-Lax, dog turds, mail order catalogues with pictures of nude 
Oriental women in them. Nobody paid much attention to him, but when Mr 
Sadat was assassinated in, when was it, '82, the CIA ran a check on Hundy 
and it was the Agency made available the files we saw. Never been arrested or 
anything but what a nut. Runs up thousand-dollar phone bills making prank 
calls to the Middle East. I saw this letter he wrote to Golda Meir where he 
called her his kissing cousin... I mean, you have to be suspicious when 
somebody like him steps forward. Seemed harmless enough, wasn't even after 
the reward — we had an undercover approach him with a phony check, he 
wouldn't touch it. But it's the ones like him that you've really got to wonder. I 
remember Morris Lee Harden back in '78, seemed like the sweetest thing 
going, repairing all those clocks and watches and giving them to the poor 
kids, but I'll never forget the day they went out behind that jewelry shop of his 
with the backhoe 'These kids don't remember Morris, Harv,' said Sciola, 


letting the cigarette fall from his fingers. That was before their time.’ 


We stood there a moment or two longer, an awkward semicircle on the 
flagstones, and just as it seemed that everyone was going to open his mouth at 
once and say he had to be going, I heard a strange, choked noise from 
Camilla. I looked over at her in amazement. She was crying. 


For a moment, no one seemed to know what to do. Davenport gave Henry 
and me a disgusted look and turned half away as if to say: this is all your fault. 


Sciola, blinking in slow, somber consternation, twice reached to put his hand 
upon her arm, and on the third try his slow fingertips finally made contact 
with her elbow. 'Dear,' he said to her, 'dear, you want us to drop you off home 
on our way?’ 


Their car — a car you'd expect, a black Ford sedan — was parked —.*« at the 
bottom of the hill, in the gravel lot behind the Science ™ Building. Camilla 
walked ahead between the two of them. Sciola was talking to her, as 
soothingly as to a child; we could hear him above the crunching footsteps, the 
drip of water and the sift of wind in the trees overhead. 'Is your brother at 
home?" he said. 


"Yes. 
He nodded slowly. 'You know, ' he said, 'I like your brother. 


He's a good kid. It's funny, but I didn't know a boy and a girl could be twins. 
Did you know that, Harv?' he said over her head. 


'No.' 


'I didn't know it, either. Did you look more alike when you were little kids? I 
mean, there's a family resemblance, but your hair's not even quite the same 
color. My wife, she's got some cousins, they're twins. They both look alike 
and they both work for the Welfare Department, too.' He paused peacefully. 
"You and your brother, you get along pretty well, don't you?’ 


She made a muffled reply. 


He nodded somberly. That's nice,’ he said. 'I bet you kids have some 
interesting stories. About ESP and things like that. 


My wife's cousins, they go to these twin conventions they have sometimes, 
you wouldn't believe the things they come back and tell us. 


White sky. Trees fading at the skyline, the mountains gone. 


My hands dangled from the cuffs of my jacket as if they weren't my own. I 
never got used to the way the horizon there could just erase itself and leave 
you marooned, adrift, in an incomplete dreamscape that was like a sketch for 
the world you knew — the outline of a single tree standing in for a grove, 
lamp-posts and chimneys floating up out of context before the surrounding 
canvas was filled in — an amnesia-land, a kind of skewed Heaven where the 
old landmarks were recognizable but spaced too far apart, and disarranged, 
and made terrible by the emptiness around them. 


An old shoe was lying on the asphalt in front of the loading dock, where the 
ambulance had been only minutes before. It wasn't Bunny's shoe. I don't know 
whose it was or how it got there. It was just an old tennis shoe lying on its 
side. I don't know why I remember that now, or why it made such an 
impression on me. 


Chapter 7 ^ 


Although Bunny hadn't known many people at Hampden, it was such a small 
school that almost everyone had been aware of him in some way or other; 
people knew his name, knew him by sight, remembered the sound of his voice 
which was in many ways his most distinct feature of all. Odd, but even though 
I have a snapshot or two of Bunny it is not the face but the voice, the lost 
voice, which has stayed with me over the years — strident, ^Jl garrulous, 
abnormally resonant, once heard it was not easily forgotten, and in those first 
days after his death the dining halls were strangely quiet without that great 
braying hee-haw of his echoing in its customary place by the milk machine. 


It was normal, then, that he should be missed, even mourned — for it's a hard 
thing when someone dies at a school like Hampden, where we were all so 
isolated, and thrown so much together. But I was surprised at the wanton 
display of grief which spewed forth once his death became official. It seemed 
not only gratuitous, but rather shameful given the circumstances. No one had 
seemed very torn up by his disappearance, even in those grim final days when 
it seemed that the news when it came must certainly be bad; nor, in the public 
eye, had the search seemed much besides a massive inconvenience. But now, 
at news of his death, people were strangely frantic. Everyone, suddenly, had 
known him; everyone was deranged with grief; everyone was just going to 
have to try and get on as well as they could without him. 'He would have 
wanted it that way.' That was a phrase I heard many times that week on the 
lips of people who had absolutely no idea what Bunny wanted; college 
officials, anonymous weepers, strangers who clutched and sobbed outside the 
dining halls; from the Board of Trustees, who, in a defensive and carefully 
worded statement, said that ‘in harmony with the unique spirit of Bunny 
Corcoran, as well as the humane and progressive ideals of Hampden College,’ 
a large gift was being made in his name to the American Civil Liberties Union 
— an organization Bunny would certainly have abhorred, had he been aware of 
its existence. 


I really could go on for pages about all the public histrionics in the days after 
Bunny's death. The flag flew at half-mast. The psychological counselors were 
on call twenty-four hours a day. 


A few oddballs from the Political Science department wore black armbands. 
There was an agitated flurry of tree plantings, memorial services, fund-raisers 
and concerts. A freshman girl attempted suicide — for entirely unrelated 
reasons — by eating poison berries from a bush outside the Music Building, 
but somehow this was all tied in with the general hysteria. Everyone wore 
sunglasses for days. Frank and Jud, taking as always the view that Life Must 


Go On, went around with their paint can collecting money for a Beer Blast to 
be held in Bunny's memory. 


This was thought to be in bad taste by certain of the school officials, 
especially as Bunny's death had brought to public attention the large number 
of alcohol-related functions at Hampden, but Frank and Jud were unmoved. 
'He would have wanted us to party,’ they said sullenly, which certainly was 
not the case; but then again, the Student Services office lived in mortal fear of 
Frank and Jud. Their fathers were on the lifetime board of directors; Frank's 
dad had donated money for a new library and Jud's had built the Science 
Building; theory had it that the two of them were unexpellable, and a 
reprimand from the Dean of Studies was not going to stop them from doing 
anything they felt like doing. So the Beer Blast went on, and was just the sort 
of tasteless and incoherent event you might expect — but I am getting ahead of 
my story. 


Hampden College, as a body, was always strangely prone to hysteria. 
Whether from isolation, malice, or simple boredom, people there were far 
more credulous and excitable than educated people are generally believed to 
be, and this hermetic, overheated atmosphere made it a thriving black petri 
dish of melodrama and distortion. I remember well, for instance, the blind 
animal terror which ensued when some townie set off the civil defense sirens 
as a joke. Someone said it was a nuclear attack; TV and radio reception, never 
good there in the mountains, happened to be particularly bad that night, and in 
the ensuing stampede for the telephones the switchboard shorted out, plunging 
the school into a violent and almost unimaginable panic. Cars collided in the 
parking lot. People screamed, wept, gave away their possessions, huddled in 
small groups for comfort and warmth. Some hippies barricaded themselves in 
the Science Building, in the lone bomb shelter, and refused to let anyone in 
who didn't know the words to ‘Sugar Magnolia.’ Factions formed, leaders rose 
from the chaos. Though the world, in fact, was not destroyed, everyone had a 
marvelous time and people spoke fondly of the event for years afterward. 


Though not nearly so spectacular, this manifestation of grief for Bunny was 
in many ways a similar phenomenon — an affirmation of community, a 
formulaic expression of homage and dread. Learn by Doing is the motto of 
Hampden. People experienced a sense of invulnerability and well-being by 
attending rap sessions, outdoor flute concerts; enjoyed having an official 
excuse to compare nightmares or break down in public. In a certain sense it 
was simply play-acting but at Hampden, where creative expression was 
valued above all else, play-acting was itself a kind of work, and people went 
about their grief as seriously as small children will sometimes play quite 
grimly and without pleasure in make-believe offices and stores. 


The mourning of the hippies, in particular, had an almost anthropological 


significance. Bunny, in life, had been at almost perpetual war with them: the 
hippies contaminating the bathtub with tie-dye and playing their stereos 
loudly to annoy him; Bunny bombarding them with empty soda cans and 
calling Security whenever he thought they were smoking pot. Now that he 
was dead, they marked his passage to another plane in impersonal and almost 
tribal fashion — chanting, weaving mandalas, beating on drums, performing 
their own inscrutable and mysterious rites. 


Henry stopped to watch them at a distance, resting the ferrule of his umbrella 
on the toe of his khaki-gaitered shoe. 


Is «mandala» a Pali word?’ I asked him. 
He shook his head. 'No,' he said. 'Sanskrit. Means «circle."' 
‘So this is some Hindu kind of thing?’ 


"Not necessarily,’ he said, looking the hippies up and down as if they were 
animals in a zoo. "They have come to be associated with Tantrism — mandalas, 
that is. Tantrism acted as a kind of corrupting influence upon the Indian 
Buddhist pantheon, though of course elements of it were assimilated into and 
restructured by the Buddhist tradition, until, by a.d .800, say, Tantrism had an 
academic tradition of its own — a corrupt tradition, to my way of thinking, but 
a tradition nonetheless.’ He paused, watching a girl with a tambourine twirling 
dizzily on the lawn. 'But to answer your question,’ he said, 'I believe that the 
mandala actually has quite a respectable place in the history of Theravada, 
Buddhism proper. 


One finds their features in reliquary mounds on the Gangetic plain and 
elsewhere from as early as the first century a. d.' 


Reading back over this, I feel that in some respects I've done Bunny an 
injustice. People really did like him. No one had known him all that well but it 
was a strange feature of his personality that the less one actually knew him, 
the more one felt one did. 


Viewed from a distance, his character projected an impression of solidity and 
wholeness which was in fact as insubstantial as a hologram; up close, he was 
all motes and light, you could pass your hand right through him. If you 
stepped back far enough, however, the illusion would click in again and there 
he would be, bigger than life, squinting at you from behind his little glasses 
and raking back a dank lock of hair with one hand. 


A character like his disintegrates under analysis. It can only be denned by the 
anecdote, the chance encounter or the sentence overheard. People who had 
never once spoken to him suddenly remembered, with a pang of affection, 


having seen him throwing sticks to a dog or stealing tulips from a teacher's 
garden. 'He touched people's lives,’ said the college president, leaning forward 
to grip the podium with both his hands; and though he was to repeat the exact 
phrase, in the exact way, two months later at a memorial service for the 
freshman girl (who'd fared better with a singleedged razor blade than with the 
poison berries), it was, in Bunny's case at least, strangely true. He did touch 
people's lives, the lives of strangers, in an entirely unanticipated way. It was 
they who really mourned him — or what they thought was him — with a grief 
that was no less sharp for not being intimate with its object. 


It was this unreality of character, this cartoonishness if you will, which was 
the secret of his appeal and what finally made his death so sad. Like any great 
comedian, he colored his environment wherever he went; in order to marvel at 
his constancy you wanted to see him in all sorts of alien situations: Bunny 
riding a camel, Bunny babysitting, Bunny in space. Now, in death, this 
constancy crystallized and became something else entirely: he was an old 
familiar jokester cast — with surprising effect — in the tragic role. 


When the snow finally melted it went as quickly as it had come. 


In twenty-four hours it was all gone except for some lovely shady patches in 
the woods — white-laced branches dripping rain holes in the crust — and the 
slushy gray piles at the roadside. Commons lawn stretched out wide and 
desolate like some Napoleonic battlefield: churned, sordid, roiled with 
footprints. 


It was a strange, fragmented time. In the days before the funeral none of us 
saw each other very much. The Corcorans had spirited Henry back to 
Connecticut with them; Cloke, who seemed to me close on the verge of a 
nervous breakdown, went uninvited to stay at Charles and Camilla's, where he 
drank Grolsch beer by the six-pack and fell asleep on the couch with lighted 
cigarettes. I myself was encumbered with Judy Poovey and her friends Tracy 
and Beth. At mealtimes they came regularly to fetch me (‘Richard,'Judy would 
say, reaching across the table to squeeze my hand, 'you must eat’) and for the 
rest of the time I was captive to little activities they planned for me — drive-in 
movies and Mexican food, going to Tracy's apartment for Margaritas and 
MTV. Though I didn't mind the drive-ins, I did not care for the continual 
parade of nachos and tequila-based drinks. They were crazy about something 
called Kamikazes, and liked to dye their Margaritas a horrifying electric blue. 


Actually, I was often glad of their company. Despite her faults, Judy was a 
kindly soul, and she was so bossy and talkative that I felt oddly safe with her. 
Beth I disliked. She was a dancer, from Santa Fe, with a rubbery face and an 
idiotic giggle and dimples all over when she smiled. At Hampden she was 
thought something of a beauty but I loathed her lolloping, spaniel-like walk 


and her little-girl voice — very affected, it seemed to me — which degenerated 
frequently into a whine. She had also had a nervous breakdown or two, and 
sometimes, in repose, she got a kind of walleyed look that made me nervous. 
Tracy was great. She was pretty and Jewish, with a dazzling smile and a 
penchant for Mary Tyler Moore mannerisms like hugging herself or twirling 
around with her arms outstretched. The three of them smoked a lot, told long 
boring stories (‘So, like, our plane just sat on the runway for five hours') and 
talked about people I didn't know. I, the absentminded bereaved, was free to 
stare peacefully out the window. But sometimes I grew tired of them, and if I 
complained of a headache or said I wanted to go to sleep, Tracy and Beth 
would disappear with prearranged swiftness and there I would be, alone with 
Judy. She meant well, 1 suppose, but the type of comfort she wished to offer 
did not much appeal to me and after ten or twenty minutes alone with her I 
was ready again for any amount of Margaritas and MTV at Tracy's. 


Francis, alone of us all, was unencumbered and occasionally he stopped by 
to see me. Sometimes he found me alone; when he did not he would sit stiffly 
in my desk chair and pretend, Henrylike, to examine my Greek books until 
even dimwit Tracy got the hint and left. As soon as the door closed and he 
heard footsteps on the stairs he would shut the book on his finger and lean 
forward, agitated and blinking. Our main worry at the time was the autopsy 
Bunny's family had requested; we were shocked when Henry, in Connecticut, 
got us word that one was in progress, by slipping away from the Corcorans' 
house one afternoon to call Francis from a pay phone, under the flapping 
banners and striped awnings of a used-car lot, with a highway roaring in the 
background. He'd overheard Mrs Corcoran tell Mr Corcoran that it was all for 
the best, that otherwise (and Henry swore he'd heard this very distinctly) 
they'd never know for sure. 


Whatever else one may say about guilt, it certainly lends one diabolical 
powers of invention; and I spent two or three of the worst nights I had, then or 
ever, lying awake drunk with a horrible taste of tequila in my mouth and 
worrying about clothing filaments, fingerprints, strands of hair. All I knew 
about autopsies was what I had seen on reruns of'Quincy,' but somehow it 
never occurred to me that my information might be inaccurate because it came 
from a TV show. Didn't they research these things carefully, have a consulting 
physician on the set? I sat up, turned on the lights; my mouth was stained a 
ghastly blue. When the drinks came up in the bathroom they were brilliant- 
hued, perfectly clear, a rush of vibrant acid turquoise the color of Ty DBol. 


But Henry, free as he was to observe the Corcorans in their own habitat, 
soon figured out what was going on. Francis was so impatient with his happy 
news that he did not even wait for Tracy and Judy to leave the room but told 
me immediately, in sloppily inflected Greek, while sweet dopey Tracy 
wondered aloud at our wanting to keep up our schoolwork at a time like this. 


'Do not fear,’ he said to me. 'It is the mother. She is concerned with the 
dishonor of the son having to do with wine. 


I did not understand what he meant. The form of 'dishonor' (mtfiia) that he 
used also meant ‘loss of civil rights.’ 


‘Atimiaf I repeated. 

"Yes.' 

"But rights are for living men, not for the dead.' 
‘Oifwi,' he said, shaking his head. 'Oh, dear. No. No.’ 


He cast about, snapping his fingers, while Judy and Tracy looked on in 
interest. It is harder to carry on a conversation in a dead language than you 
might think. 'There has been much rumor, he said at last. «The mother 
grieves. Not for her son,' he added hastily, when he saw I was about to speak, 
‘for she is a wicked woman. 


Rather she grieves for the shame which has fallen on her house.’ 
"What shame is this?’ 


'Oivov,' he said impatiently. '(Ddpfia Kov. She seeks to show that his corpse 
does not hold wine' (and here he employed a very elegant and untranslatable 
metaphor: dregs in the empty wineskin of his body). 


‘And why, pray tell, does she care?’ 


"Because there is talk among the citizens. It is shameful for a young man to 
die while drunk.’ 


This was true, about the talk at least. Mrs Corcoran, who previously had put 
herself at the disposal of anyone who would listen, was angry at the 
unflattering position in which she now found herself. Early articles, which had 
depicted her as 'well dressed,’ 


‘striking,’ the family ‘perfect,’ had given way to snide and vaguely accusatory 
ones of the ilk of mom sez: not my kid. 


Though there was only a poor beer bottle to suggest the presence of alcohol, 
and no real evidence of drugs at all, psychologists on 43i the evening news 
spoke oi dysfunctional families, the phenom- gg cnon of denial, pointed out 
that addictive tendencies were often ' passed from parent to child. It was a 
hard blow. Mrs Corcoran, leaving Hampden, walked through the crush of her 
old pals the reporters with her eyes averted and her teeth clenched in a 


brilliant hateful smile. 


Of course, it was unfair. From the news accounts one would have thought 
Bunny the most stereotypical ofsubstance abusers' or ‘troubled teens.’ It did 
not matter a whit that everyone who knew him (including us: Bunny was no 
juvenile delinquent) denied this; no matter that the autopsy showed only a tiny 
percentage of blood alcohol and no drugs at all; no matter that he was not 
even a teenager: the rumors — wheeling vulture-like in the skies above his 
corpse — had finally descended and sunk in their claws for good. A paragraph 
which blandly stated the results J| of the autopsy appeared in the back of the 
Hampden Examiner. But in college folklore he is remembered as a stumbling 
teen inebriate; his beery ghost is still evoked in darkened rooms, for freshmen, 
along with the car-crash decapitees and the bobby soxer who hanged herself 
in Putnam attic and all the rest of the shadowy ranks of the Hampden dead. 


The funeral was set for Wednesday. On Monday morning I found two 
envelopes in my mailbox: one from Henry, the other from Julian. I 
openedjulian's first. It was postmarked New York and was written hastily, in 
the red pen he used for correcting our Greek. 


Dear Richard — How very unhappy I am this morning, as I know I will be for 
many mornings to come. The news of our friend's death has saddened me 
greatly. I do not know if you have tried to reach me, I have been away, 1 have 
not been well, I doubt if I shall return to Hampden until after the funeral How 
sad it is to think that Wednesday will be the last time that we shall all be 
together. I hope this letter finds you well. It brings love. 


At the bottom were his initials. 


Henry's letter, from Connecticut, was as stilted as a crypto gram from the 
western front. 


Dear Richard, 


I hope you are well. For several days I have been at the Corcorans' house. 
Although I feel I am less comfort to them than they, in their bereavement, can 
recognize, they have allowed me to be of help to them in many small 
household matters. 


Mr Corcoran has asked me to write to Bunny's friends at school and extend 
an invitation to spend the night before the funeral at his house. I understand 
you will be put up in the basement. If you do not plan to attend, please 
telephone Mrs Corcoran and let her know. 


I look forward to seeing you at the funeral if not, as I hope, before. 


There was no signature, but instead a tag from the Iliad, in Greek. 


It was from the eleventh book, when Odysseus, cut off from his friends, finds 
himself alone and on enemy territory: Be strong, saith my heart; I am a 
soldier; I have seen worse sights than this. 


I rode down to Connecticut with Francis. Though I'd expected the twins to 
come with us, instead they went a day earlier with Cloke — who, to everyone's 
surprise, had received a personal invitation from Mrs Corcoran herself. We 
had thought he would not be invited at all. After Sciola and Davenport caught 
him trying to leave town, Mrs Corcoran had refused to even speak to him. 
(‘She's saving face,' said Francis.) At any rate, he'd got the personal invitation, 
and there had also been invitations — relayed through Henry — for Cloke's 
friends Rooney Wynne and Bram Guernsey. 


Actually, the Corcorans had invited quite a few people from Hampden — 
dorm acquaintances, people I didn't know Bunny even knew. A girl named 
Sophie Dearbold, whom I knew slightly from French class, was to ride down 
with Francis and me. 


"How did Bunny know her?’ I asked Francis on the way to her dorm. 


'I don't think he did, not well. He did have a crush on her, though, freshman 
year. I'm sure Marion won't like it a bit that they've asked her. 


Though I'd feared that the ride down might be awkward, in fact it was a 
wonderful relief to be around a stranger. We almost had fun, with the radio 
going and Sophie (brown-eyed, gravel-voiced) leaning on folded arms over 
the front seat talking to us, and Francis in a better mood than I'd seen him in 
in ages. 


"You look like Audrey Hepburn,’ he told her, 'you know that?’ 


She gave us Kools and cinnamon gumballs, told funny stories. I laughed and 
looked out the window and prayed we'd miss our turn. I had never been to 
Connecticut in my life. I had never been to a funeral, either. 


Shady Brook was on a narrow road that veered off sharply from the highway 
and twisted along for many miles, over bridges, past farmland and horse 
pastures and fields. After a time the rolling meadows segued into a golf 
course. shady brook country club, said the wood-burned sign that swung in 
front of the mock-Tudor clubhouse. The houses began after that — large, 
handsome, widely spaced, each set on its own six or seven acres of land. 


The place was like a maze. Francis looked for numbers on the mailboxes, 
nosing into one false trail after another and backing out again, cursing, 


grinding the gears. There were no signs and no apparent logic to the house 
numbers, and after we'd poked around blind for about half an hour, I began to 
hope that we would never find it at all, that we could just turn around and 
have a jolly ride back to Hampden. 


But of course we did find it. At the end of its own cul-de-sac, it was a large 
modern house of the ‘architectural’ sort, bleached I cedar, its split levels and 
asymmetrical terraces selt-consciously bare. The yard was paved with black 
cinder, and there was no greenery at all except a few gingko trees in 
postmodern tubs, placed at dramatic intervals. 


"Wow, ' said Sophie, a true Hampden girl, ever dutiful in homage to the New. 
I looked over at Francis and he shrugged. 
"His mom likes modern architecture,’ he said. 


I had never seen the man who answered the door but with a sick, dreamlike 
feeling I recognized him instantly. He was big and red in the face, with a 
heavy jaw and a full head of white hair; for a moment he stared at us, his 
smallish mouth fallen open into a tight, round o. Then, surprisingly boyish 
and quick, he sprang forward and seized Francis's hand. 'Well,' he said. 


"Well, well, well.’ His voice was nasal, garrulous, Bunny's voice. 
‘Tf it's not the old Carrot Top, How are you, boy?’ 


‘Pretty good,’ said Francis, and I was a little surprised at the depth and 
warmth with which he said it, and the strength with which he returned the 
handshake. 


Mr Corcoran slung a heavy arm around his neck and pulled him close. This 
one's my boy,’ he said to Sophie and me, reaching up to tousle Francis's hair. 
"All my brothers were redheads and out of my boys there's not an honest-to- 
god redhead in the bunch. Can't understand it. Who are you, sweetheart?’ he 
said to Sophie, disengaging his arm and reaching for her hand. 


‘Hi. I'm Sophie Dearbold.' 


"Well, you're mighty pretty. Isn't she pretty, boys. You look just like your 
aunt Jean, honey.’ 


"What?' said Sophie, after a confused pause. 


"Why, your aunt, honey. Your daddy's sister. That pretty Jean Lickfold that 
won the ladies' golf tournament out at the club last year.' 


'No, sir. Dearbold.' 


"Dearfold. Well, isn't that strange .1 don't know of any Dear folds around 
here. Now, I used to know a fellow name of Breedlow, but that must have 
been, oh, twenty years ago. He was in business. They say he embezzled a cool 
five million from his partner,’ Tm not from around here.’ 


He cocked an eyebrow at her, in a manner reminiscent of Bunny. 'No?' he 
said. 


'No.' 

"Not from Shady Brook?’ He said it as if he could hardly believe it. 
'No.' 

"Then where you from, honey? Greenwich?’ 

‘Detroit.’ 

‘Bless your heart then. To come all this way.’ 


Sophie, smiling, shook her head and started to explain when, with absolutely 
no warning, Mr Corcoran flung his arms around her and burst into tears. 


We were frozen with horror. Sophie's eyes, over his heaving shoulder, were 
round and aghast as if he'd run her through with a knife. 


‘Oh, darling,’ he wailed, his face buried deep in her neck. 
‘Honey, how are we going to get along without him?’ 
‘Come on, Mr Corcoran,’ said Francis, tugging at his sleeve. 


"We loved him a lot, honey,’ sobbed Mr Corcoran. 'Didn't we? He loved you, 
too. He would have wanted you to know that. You know that, don't you, 
dear?’ 


"Mr Corcoran,’ said Francis, grabbing him by the shoulders and shaking him 
hard. 'Mr Corcoran.’ 


He turned and fell back against Francis, bellowing. 


I ran around to the other side and managed to get his arm around my neck. 
His knees sagged; he almost pulled me down but somehow, staggering 
beneath his weight, Francis and I got him to his feet and together we 
maneuvered him inside and I weaved down the hall with him (‘Oh, shit,’ I 


heard Sophie murmur, 'shit.') and got him into a chair. 


He was still crying. His face was purple. When I reached down to loosen his 
collar he grabbed me by the wrist. 'Gone,' he wailed, looking me straight in 
the eye. 'My baby.’ 


His gaze — helpless, wild — hit me like a blackjack. Suddenly, and for the first 
time, really, I was struck by the bitter, irrevocable truth of it; the evil of what 
we had done. It was like running full speed into a brick wall. I let go his 
collar, feeling completely helpless. I wanted to die. 'Oh, God,’ I mumbled, 
‘God help me, I'm sorry ' 


I felt a fierce kick in my anklebone. It was Francis. His face was as white as 
chalk. 


A shaft of light splintered painfully in my vision. I clutched the back of the 
chair, closed my eyes and saw luminous red as the rhythmic noise of his sobs 
fell over and over again, like a bludgeon. 


Then, very abruptly, they stopped. Everything was quiet. I opened my eyes. 
Mr Corcoran — leftover tears still rolling down his cheeks but his face 
otherwise composed — was looking with interest at a spaniel puppy who was 
gnawing furtively at the toe of his shoe. 


‘Jennie,’ he said severely. 'Bad girl. Didn't Mama put you out? 
Huh?’ 


With a cooing, baby noise, he reached down and scooped up the little dog — 
its feet paddling furiously in midair — and carried her out of the room. 


‘Now, go on,' I heard him say airily. 'Scat.' 


A screen door creaked somewhere. In a moment he was back: calm now, 
beaming, a dad from an ad. 


"Any of you kids care for a beer?’ he said. 


We were all agog. No one answered him. I stared at him, trembling, ashen- 
faced. 


‘Come on, guys,' he said, and winked. 'No takers?’ 


At last, Francis cleared his throat with a rasping sound. 'Ah, I believe I'd like 
one, yes.' 


There was a silence. 


The, too,' said Sophie. 

Three?’ said Mr Corcoran to me jovially, holding up three fingers. 
I moved my mouth but no sound came out of it. 

He put his head to the side, as if fixing me with his good eye. 

'I don't think we've met, have we, son?’ 

I shook my head. 


"Macdonald Corcoran,’ he said, leaning forward to offer his hand. 'Call me 
Mack.’ 


I mumbled my own name. 
"What's that?’ he said brightly, hand to ear. 
I said it again, louder this time. 


‘Ah! So you're the one from California! Where's your tan, son?' He laughed 
loudly at his joke and went to fetch the beers. 


I sat down hard, exhausted and almost sick. We were in an overscaled, 
Architectural Digest sort of room, big and loft-like, with skylights and a 
fieldstone fireplace, chairs upholstered in white leather, kidney-shaped coffee 
table — modern, expensive, Italian stuff. Running along the back wall was a 
long glass trophy case filled with loving cups, ribbons, school and sports 
memorabilia; in ominous proximity were several large funeral wreaths which, 
in conjunction with the trophies, gave that corner of the room a Kentucky 
Derby sort of look. 


‘This is a beautiful space,’ said Sophie. Her voice echoed amid the sharp 
surfaces and the polished floor. 


"Why, thank you, honey,’ Mr Corcoran said from the kitchen. 


"We were in House Beautiful last year, and the Home section of the Times 
the year before that. Not quite what I'd pick myself, but Kathy's the decorator 
in the family, y'know.’ 


The doorbell rang. We looked at each other. Then it rang again, two 
melodious chimes, and Mrs Corcoran clicked through from the back of the 
house and past us without a word or a glance. 


Henry,’ she called. 'Your guests are here.’ Then she opened the front door. 


‘Hello,’ she said to the delivery boy who was standing outside. "Which one are 
you? Are you from Sunset Florists?’ 


"Yes, ma'am. Please sign. 


"Now wait just a minute. I called you people earlier. I want to know why you 
delivered all these wreaths here while I was out this morning.’ 


'I didn't deliver them. I just came on shift.’ 
"You're with Sunset Florists, aren't you?’ 


"Yes, ma'am." I felt sorry for him. He was a teenager, with blotches of flesh- 
colored Clearasil scattered over his face. 


'I asked specifically that only floral arrangements and house plants be sent 
here. These wreaths should all be down at the funeral home.’ 


Tm sorry, lady. If you want to call the manager or something ' 


Tm afraid you don't understand. I don't want these wreaths in my house. I 
want you to pack them right back up in your truck and take them to the 
funeral home. And don't try to give me that one, either,’ she said as he held up 
a gaudy wreath of red and yellow carnations. ‘Just tell me who it's from.’ 


The boy squinted at his clipboard. ' «With sympathy, Mr and Mrs Robert 
Bartle." 


‘Ah!’ said Mr Corcoran, who had come back with the beers; he had them all 
clasped together in his hands, very clumsily, without a tray. "That from Betty 
and Bob?’ 


Mrs Corcoran ignored him. 'I guess you can go ahead and bring in those 
ferns,’ she said to the delivery boy, eyeing the foil-wrapped pots with loathing. 


After he had gone Mrs Corcoran began to inspect the ferns, lifting up the 
fronds to check for dead foliage, making notes on the backs of the envelopes 
with a tiny silver screw-point pencil. .» To her husband she said: 'Did you see 
that wreath the Bartles ' sent?’ 


"Wasn't that nice of them.' 


"No, in fact I don't think it appropriate for an employee to send something 
like that. I wonder, is Bob thinking about asking you for a raise?’ 


‘Now, hon.' 


'I can't believe these plants, either,’ she said, jabbing a forefinger into the soil. 
"This African violet is almost dead. Louise would be humiliated if she knew.’ 


‘It's the thought that counts.’ 


'I know, but still, if I've learned one thing from this it is never to order 
flowers from Sunset Florists again. All the things from Tina's Flowerland are 
so much nicer. Francis,’ she said, in the same bored tone and without looking 
up. 'You haven't been to see us since last Easter.’ 


Francis took a sip of his beer. 'Oh, I've been fine,’ he said stagily. 'How are 
you?’ 


She sighed and shook her head. 'It's been terribly hard,’ she said. 'We're all 
trying to take things one day at a time. I never realized before how very 
difficult it can be for a parent to just let go and... Henry, is that you?’ she said 
sharply at the sound of some scuffling on the landing. 


A pause. 'No, Mom, just me.' 
'Go find him, Pat, and tell him to get down here,’ she said. 


Then she turned back to Francis. 'We got a lovely spray of Easter lilies from 
your mother this morning,’ she said to him. 'How is she?’ 


‘Oh, she's fine. She's in the city now. She was really upset,’ he added 
uncomfortably, ‘when she heard about Bunny.’ (Francis had told me she was 
hysterical on the telephone and had to go take a pill.) 


‘She is such a lovely person,’ said Mrs Corcoran sweetly. 'I was so sorry 
when I heard she'd been admitted to the Betty Ford Center.’ 


‘She was only there for a couple of days,’ said Francis. 


She raised an eyebrow. 'Oh? She made that much progress, did she? I've 
always heard it was an excellent place. 


Francis cleared his throat. 'Well, she mainly went out there for a rest. Quite a 
number of people do that, you know.’ 


Mrs Corcoran looked surprised. 'Oh, you don't mind talking about it, do 
you?’ she said. 'I don't think you should. I think it's very modern of your 
mother to realize that she needed help. Not so long ago one simply didn't 
admit to problems of that nature. 


When I was a girl ' 


"Well, well, speak of the Devil,’ boomed Mr Corcoran. 


Henry, in a dark suit, was creaking down the stairs with a stiff, measured 
tread. 


Francis stood up. I did, too. He ignored us. 
‘Come on in here, son,' said Mr Corcoran. 'Grab yourself a brewski.' 
"Thank you, no,’ said Henry. 


Up close, I was startled to see how pale he was. His face was leaden and set 
and beads of perspiration stood out on his forehead. 


"What you boys been doing up there all afternoon?’ Mr Corcoran said 
through a mouthful of ice. 


Henry blinked at him. 
'Huh?' said Mr Corcoran pleasantly. Looking at girlie magazines? 
Building yourselves a ham radio set?’ 


Henry passed a hand — which, I saw, trembled slightly — over his forehead. 'I 
was reading,’ he said. 


Reading?’ said Mr Corcoran, as if he'd never heard of such a thing. 
"Yes, sir.’ 

"What is it? Something good?’ 

The Upanishads.’ 


"Well aren't you smart. You know, I've got a whole shelf of books down in 
the basement if you want to take a look. Even have a couple old Perry 
Masons. They're pretty good. Exactly like the TV show, except Perry gets a 
little sexy with Delia and sometimes he'll say «damn» and stuff.’ 


Mrs Corcoran cleared her throat. 


Henry,’ she said smoothly, reaching for her drink, 'I'm sure the young people 
would like to see where they'll be staying. Maybe they have some luggage in 
the car.’ 


"All right.’ 


‘Check the downstairs bathroom to make sure there are enough washcloths 
and towels. If there aren't, get some from the linen closet in the hall.' 


Henry nodded but before he could answer Mr Corcoran suddenly came up 
behind him. 'This boy,' he said, slapping him on the back — I saw Henry's neck 
clench and his teeth sink into his lower lip — 'is one in a million. Isn't he a 
prince, Kathy?’ 


'He has certainly been quite a help,’ said Mrs Corcoran coolly. 


"You bet your boots he has. I don't know what we would've done this week 
without him. You kids,’ said Mr Corcoran, a hand clamped on Henry's 
shoulder, ‘better hope you've got friends like this one. They don't come along 
like this every day. No, sir. 


Why, I'll never forget, it was Bunny's first night at Hampden, he called me 
up on the telephone. «Dad,» he said to me, «Dad, you ought to see this nut 
they gave me for a roommate.» 


«Stick it out, son,» I told him, «give it a chance» and before you could spit it 
was Henry this, Henry that, he's changing his major from whatever the hell it 
was to ancient Greek. Tearing off to Italy. 


Happy as aclam.' The tears were welling in his eyes. 'Just goes to show,' he 
said, shaking Henry's shoulder with a kind of rough affection. 'Never judge a 
book by its cover. Old Henry here may look like he's got a stick up his butt 
but there never breathed a finer fella. Why, just about the last time I spoke to 
the old Bunster he was all excited about taking off to France with this guy in 
the summer ' 


"Now, Mack,’ said Mrs Corcoran, but it was too late. He was crying again. 


It was not as bad as the first time but still it was bad. He threw his arms 
around Henry and sobbed in his lapel while Henry just stood there, gazing 
offinto the distance with a haggard, stoic calm. 


Everyone was embarrassed. Mrs Corcoran began to pick at the house plants 
and I, ears burning, was staring at my lap when a door slammed and two 
young men sauntered into the wide, high-raftered hall. There was no 
mistaking for an instant who they were. The light was behind them, I couldn't 
see either of them very well but they were laughing and talking and, oh, God, 
what a bright sudden stab in my heart at the echo of Bunny which rang — 
harsh, derisive, vibrant — through their laughter. 


They ignored their father's tears and marched right up to him. 


"Hey, Pop,’ said the eldest. He was curly haired, about thirty, and looked very 
much like Bunny in the face. A baby wearing a little cap that said Red Sox 
was perched high on his hip. 


The other brother — freckled, thinner, with a too-dark tan and black circles 
under his blue eyes — took the baby. 'Here,' he said. 


'Go see Grandpa.’ 


Mr Corcoran stopped crying instantly, in mid-sob; he held the baby high in 
the air and looked up at it adoringly. 'Champ!' he shouted. "Did you go for a 
ride with Daddy and Uncle Brady?’ 


"We took him to Mc Donald's,’ said Brady. 'Got him a Happy Meal.’ 


Mr Corcoran's jaw dropped in wonder. 'Did you eat it all?’ he asked the baby. 
"All that Happy Meal?’ 


‘Say yes,’ cooed the baby's father. ' «Yes, Drampaw."' 

‘That's baloney, Ted,’ said Brady, laughing. 'He didn't eat a bite of it.’ 
‘He got a prize in the box, though, didn't you? Didn't you? 

Huh?’ 


‘Let's see it,’ said Mr Corcoran, busily prying the baby's fingers from around 
it. 
Henry,’ said Mrs Corcoran, 'perhaps you'll help the young lady with her bags 


and show her to her room. Brady, you can take the boys downstairs.’ 


Mr Corcoran had got the prize — a plastic airplane — away from the baby and 
was making it fly back and forth. 


'Look!' he said, in a tone of hushed awe. 


‘Since it's only for a night,’ Mrs Corcoran said to us, 'I'm sure that no one will 
mind doubling up.’ 


As we were leaving with Brady, Mr Corcoran plumped the baby down on the 
hearth rug and was rolling around, tickling him. I could hear the baby's high 
screams of terror and delight all the way down the stairs. 


We were to stay in the basement. Along the back wall, near the Ping-Pong 
and pool tables, several army cots had been set up, and in the corner was a 
pile of sleeping bags. 


‘Isn't this wretched,’ said Francis as soon as we were alone. 
‘It's just for tonight. 
'I can't sleep in rooms with lots of people. I'll be up all night.’ 


I sat down on a cot. The room had a damp, unused smell and the light from 
the lamp over the pool table was greenish and depressing. 


‘It's dusty, too,’ said Francis. 'I think we ought to just go check into a hotel.’ 


Sniffing noisily, he complained about the dust as he searched for an ashtray 
but deadly radon could have been seeping into the room, it didn't matter to 
me. All I wondered was how, in the name of Heaven and a merciful God, was 
I going to make it through the hours ahead. We had been there only twenty 
minutes and already I felt like shooting myself. 


He was still complaining and I was still sunk in despair when Camilla came 
down. She was wearing jet earrings, patent-leather shoes, a natty, closely cut 
black velvet suit. 


‘Hello,’ Francis said, handing her a cigarette. Let's go check into the Ramada 
Inn. 


As she put the cigarette between her parched lips I realized how much I'd 
missed her for the last few days. 


‘Oh, you don't have it so bad,' she said. ‘Last night ,' had to sleep with 
Marion.’ 


‘Same room?’ 
"Same bed.' 


Francis's eyes widened with admiration and horror. 'Oh, really? Oh, I say. 
That's awful,’ he said in a hushed, respectful voice. 


‘Charles is upstairs with her now. She's hysterical because somebody asked 
that poor girl who rode down with you.’ 


"Where's Henry?’ 
"Haven't you seen him yet?’ 
'I saw him. I didn't talk to him.' 


She paused to blow out a cloud of smoke. 'How does he seem to you?’ 


Tve seen him looking better. Why?’ 

"Because he's sick. Those headaches.’ 

‘One of the bad ones?’ 

"That's what he says. 

Francis looked at her in disbelief. 'How is he up and walking around, then?’ 


'I don't know. He's all doped up. He has his pills and he's been taking them 
for days.’ 


"Well, where is he now? Why isn't he in bed?’ 


'I don't know. Mrs Corcoran just sent him down to the Cumberland Farms to 
get that damn baby a quart of milk.’ 


‘Can he drive?’ 
'I have no idea,’ 'Francis,' I said, ‘your cigarette. 


He jumped up, grabbed for it too quickly and burned his fingers. He'd laid it 
on the edge of the pool table and the coal had burned down to the wood; a 
charred spot was spreading on the varnish. 


'Boys?' Mrs Corcoran called from the head of the stairs. "Boys? 
Do you mind if I come down to check the thermostat?’ 


‘Quick,’ Camilla whispered, mashing out her cigarette. 'We're not supposed 
to smoke down here.’ 


"Who's there?’ said Mrs Corcoran sharply. 'Is something burning?’ 


"No, ma'am,’ Francis said, wiping at the burned spot and scrambling to hide 
the cigarette butt as she came down the steps. 


It was one of the worst nights of my life. The house was filling with people 
and the hours passed in a dreadful streaky blur of relatives, neighbors, crying 
children, covered dishes, blocked driveways, ringing telephones, bright lights, 
strange faces, awkward conversations. Some swinish, hard-faced man trapped 
me in a corner for hours, boasting of bass tournaments and businesses in 
Chicago and Nashville and Kansas City until finally I excused myself and 
locked myself in an upstairs bathroom, ignoring the beating and piteous cries 
of an unknown toddler who pled, weeping, for admittance. 


Dinner was set out at seven, an unappetizing combination of gourmet carry- 
out — orzo salad, duck in Campari, miniature foie gras tarts — and food the 
neighbors had made: tuna casseroles, gelatin molds in Tupperware, and a 
frightful dessert called a 'wacky cake' that I am at a loss to even describe. 
People roamed with paper plates. It was dark outside and raining. Hugh 
Corcoran, in shirtsleeves, went around with a bottle freshening drinks, 
nudging his way through the dark, murmuring crowd. 


He brushed by me without a glance. Of all the brothers, he bore the strongest 
resemblance to Bunny (Bunny's death was starting to seem some horrible kind 
of generative act, more Bunnys popping up everywhere I looked, Bunnys 
coming out of the I woodwork), and it was akin to looking into the future and 
seeing what Bunny would have looked like at thirty-five, just as looking at his 
father was like seeing him at sixty. I knew him and he didn't know me. I had a 
strong, nearly irresistible urge to take him by the arm, say something to him, 
what I didn't know: just to see the brows drop abruptly in the way I knew so 
well, to see the startled expression in the naive, muddy eyes. ft was I killed the 
old pawnbroker woman and her sister Lizaveta with an axe and robbed them. 


Laughter, vertigo. Strangers kept wandering up and talking at me. I 
disengaged myself from one of Bunny's teenaged cousins — who, upon hearing 
I was from California, had begun to ask me a lot of very complicated 
questions about surfing — and, swimming through the hobbling crowd, found 
Henry. He was standing by himself in front of some glass doors, his back to 
the room, smoking a cigarette. 


I stood beside him. He didn't look at me or speak. The doors faced out on a 
barren, floodlit terrace — black cinder, privet in concrete urns, a statue artfully 
broken in white pieces on the ground. Rain slanted in the lights, which were 
angled to cast long, dramatic shadows. The effect was fashionable, post- 
nuclear but ancient, too, like some pumice-strewn courtyard from Pompeii. 


That is the ugliest garden I have ever seen,' I said. 
"Yes,' said Henry. He was very pale. 'Rubble and ash. 


People laughed and talked behind us. The lights, through the rain-spattered 
window, cast a pattern of droplets trickling down his face. 


"Maybe you'd better lie down,’ I said after a while. 
He bit his lip. The ash on his cigarette was about an inch long. 
'I don't have any more medicine,’ he said. 


I looked at the side of his face. 'Can you get along?’ 


'I guess I'll have to, won't I?' he said without moving. 


Camilla locked the door of the bathroom behind us and the two of us, on our 
hands and knees, began to rummage through the mess of prescription bottles 
under the sink. 


' «For high blood pressure," she read. 
'No.' 

For asthma.'» 

There was a knock on the door. 


‘Somebody's in here,’ I yelled. 


Camilla's head was wedged all the way in the cabinet by the water pipes, so 
that her rear end stuck out. I could hear the medicine bottles clinking. '"Inner 
ear»?' she said, her voice muffled. ' «One cap twice daily»?' 


Let's see.’ 
She handed me some antibiotics, at least ten years old. 


‘This won't do,' I said, edging closer. 'Do you see anything with a no-refill 
sticker? From a dentist, maybe?’ 


'No.' 
' «May Cause Drowsiness»? «Do Not Drive or Operate Heavy Machinery»?' 


Someone knocked on the door again and rattled the knob. I knocked back, 
then reached up and turned on both taps full-blast. 


Our findings were not good. If Henry had been suffering from poison ivy, 
hay fever, rheumatism, pinkeye, we would have been in luck but the only 
painkiller they had was Excedrin. Out of sheer desperation I took a handful, 
also two ambiguous capsules that had a Drowsiness sticker but which I 
suspected of being antihistamines. 


I'd thought our mystery guest had left, but venturing out I was annoyed to 
find Cloke lurking outside. He gave me a contemptuous look that turned to a 
stare when Camilla — hair tousled, tugging at her skirt — stepped out behind 
me. 


If she was surprised to see him, she didn't show it. 'Oh, hello,’ she said to 
him, reaching down to dust off her knees. 


Hi.’ He glanced away in a studied, offhanded manner. We all knew Cloke 
was sort of interested in her, but even if he hadn't been, Camilla was not 
exactly the sort of girl one expected to find making out with someone in a 
locked bathroom. 


She brushed past us and headed downstairs. I started down, too, but Cloke 
coughed in a significant manner and I turned around. 


He leaned back against the wall, looking at me as if he'd had me figured out 
from the day I was born. 'So,' he said. His shirt was unironed and his shirttails 
were out; and though his eyes were red, I didn't know if he was stoned or just 
tired. 'How's it going?’ 


I paused on the landing. Camilla was at the foot of the steps, out of earshot. 
‘All right,’ I said. 


"What's the story?’ 
"What?' 


‘Better not let Kathy catch you guys screwing around in her bathroom. She'll 
make you walk to the bus station. 


His tone was neutral. Still, I was reminded of the business with Mona's 
boyfriend the week before. Cloke, however, presented little or nothing in the 
way of physical threat and besides, he had problems enough of his own. 


‘Look,’ I said, 'you've got it wrong.’ 
'I don't care. I'm just telling you.’ 
"Well, I'm telling you. Believe it or not, I don't care. 


Cloke fished lazily in his pocket, came out with a pack of Marlboros so 
crumpled and flat that it did not seem possible that a cigarette could be inside 
it. He said: 'I thought she was seeing somebody.’ 


‘For God's sake.' 


He shrugged. ‘It's no business of mine,' he said, extracting one crooked 
cigarette and crushing the empty pack in his hand. 'People were bothering me 
at school, so I was staying on their couch before we came down here. I've 
heard her talking on the phone.’ 


‘And saying what?’ 


‘Oh, nothing, but like two or three in the morning, whispering, you've got to 


wonder.’ He smiled bleakly. 'I guess she thinks I'm passed out but to tell you 
the truth I haven't been sleeping all that well... Right,’ he said, when I didn't 
answer. 'You don't know a thing about it.' 


'I don't.’ 

‘Sure.’ 

'I really don't.’ 

‘So what were you doing in there?’ 


I looked at him for a moment, and then I took out a handful of pills and held 
them out on my open palm. 


He leaned forward, brows knit, and then, quite suddenly, his foggy eyes 
became intelligent and alert. He selected a capsule and held it up to the light 
in businesslike fashion. "What is it?' he said. 'Do you know?’ 


‘Sudafed,’ I said. Don't bother. There's nothing in there.’ 


He chuckled. 'Know why?' he said, looking at me for the first time with real 
friendliness. "That's because you were looking in the wrong place.’ 


"What?’ 


He glanced over his shoulder. 'Down the hall. Off the master bedroom. I 
would have told you if you'd asked.’ 


I was startled. 'How do you know?’ 


He pocketed the capsule and raised an eyebrow at me. 'I practically grew up 
in this house,' he said. 'Old Kathy is on about sixteen different types of dope.’ 


I looked back at the closed door of the master bedroom. 

'No,' he said. 'Not now.' 

"Why not?’ 

‘Bunny's grandma. She has to lie down after she eats. We'll come up later.' 


Things downstairs had cleared out some, but not much. Camilla was 
nowhere in sight. Charles, bored and drunk, his back in a corner, was holding 
a glass to his temple as a tearful Marion babbled away — her hair pulled back 
in one of those tremendous preppy bows from the Talbots catalogue. I hadn't 
had a chance to speak to him because she had shadowed him almost 


constantly since we arrived; why she had latched so firmly on to him I don't 
know, except that she wasn't talking to Cloke, and Bunny's brothers were 
either married or engaged, and of the remaining males in her age group — 
Bunny's cousins, Henry and me, Bram Guernsey and Rooney Wynne — 
Charles was by far the best looking. 


He glanced at me over her shoulder. I didn't have the stomach to go over and 
rescue him, and I looked away; but just then a toddler — fleeing his grinning, 
jug-eared brother — slid into my legs and almost knocked me down. 


They dodged round me in circles. The smaller one, terrified and shrieking, 
dove to the floor and grabbed my knees. ‘Butthole,’ he sobbed. 


The other one stopped and took a step backwards, and there was something 
nasty and almost lascivious about the look on his face. 'Oh, Dad,’ he sang, his 
voice like spilled syrup. 'Oh, Daayid.' 


Across the room, Hugh Corcoran turned, glass in hand. 'Don't make me 
come over there, Brandon,’ he said. 


"But Corey called you a butthole, Daayid.' 
"You're a butthole,’ sobbed the little one. 'You you you. 


I pried him off my leg and went looking for Henry. He and Mr Corcoran 
were in the kitchen, surrounded by a semicircle of people: Mr Corcoran, who 
had his arm around Henry, looked as if he'd had a few too many. 


‘Now Kathy and I,' he said, in a loud, didactic voice, ‘have always opened 
our home to young people. Always an extra place at the table. First thing you 
know, they'd be coming to Kathy and me with their problems, too. Like this 
guy,’ he said, jostling Henry. Till never forget the time he came up to me one 
night 45i I after supper. He said, «Mack» — all the kids call me Mack — «I'd 
like to ask your advice about something, man to man.» 


«Well, before you start, son,» I said, «I want to tell you just one thing. 


I think I know boys pretty well. I raised five of 'em myself. And I had four 
brothers when I was coming up, so I guess you might call me a pretty good 
authority on boys in general He rambled on with this fraudulent recollection 
while Henry, pale and ill, endured his prods and backslaps as a well-trained 
dog will tolerate the pummeling of a rough child. The story itself was 
ludicrous. It had a dynamic and strangely hot-headed young Henry wanting to 
rush out and buy a used single-engine airplane against the advice of his 
parents. 


‘But this guy was determined,’ said Mr Corcoran. 'He was going to get that 
plane or bust. After he'd told me all about it I sat there for a minute and then I 
took a deep breath and I said, m «Henry, son, she sounds like a beaut, but I'm 
still going to have to be a square and agree with your folks. Let me tell you 
why that is." 


‘Hey, Dad,’ said Patrick Corcoran, who had just come in to fix himself 
another drink. He was slighter than Bun, heavily freckled, but he had Bunny's 
sandy hair and his sharp little nose. 


"Dad, you're all mixed up. That didn't happen to Henry. That was Hugh's old 
friend Walter Ballantine.’ 


‘Bosh,’ said Mr Corcoran. 
‘Sure it was. And he ended up buying the plane anyway. 


Hugh?’ he shouted into the next room. 'Hugh, do you remember Walter 
Ballantine?’ 


‘Sure,’ said Hugh, and appeared in the doorway. He had by the wrist the kid 
Brandon, who was twisting and trying furiously to get away. ‘What about 
him?’ 


‘Didn't Walter wind up buying that little Bonanza?’ 


It wasn't a Bonanza,’ said Hugh, ignoring with a glacial calm the thrashing 
and yelps of his son. 'It was a Beechcraft. No, I know what you're thinking,’ he 
said, as both Patrick and his father started to object. 'I drove out to Danbury 
with Walter to look at a little converted Bonanza, but the guy wanted way too 
much. Those things cost a fortune to maintain, and there was plenty wrong 
with it, too. He was selling it because he couldn't afford to keep it.’ 


"What about this Beechcraft, then?' said Mr Corcoran. His hand had slipped 
from Henry's shoulder. 'I've heard that's an excellent little outfit.' 


"Walter had some trouble with it. Got it through an ad in the Pennysaver, off 
some retired congressman from New Jersey. He'd used it to fly around in 
while he was campaigning and ' 


Gasping, he lurched forward as with a sudden wrench the kid broke free of 
him and shot across the room like a cannonball. 


Evading his father's tackle, he sidestepped Patrick's block as well and, 
glancing back at his pursuers, slammed right into Henry's abdomen. 


It was a hard blow. The kid began to cry. Henry's jaw dropped and every 
ounce of blood drained from his face. For a moment I was sure he would fall, 
but somehow he drew himself upright, with the dignified, massive effort of a 
wounded elephant, while Mr Corcoran threw back his head and laughed 
merrily at his distress. 


I had not entirely believed Cloke about the drugs to be found upstairs, but 
when I went up with him again I saw he had told the truth. There was a tiny 
dressing room off the master bedroom, and a black lacquer vanity with lots of 
little compartments and a tiny key, and inside one of the compartments was a 
ballotin of Godiva chocolates and a neat, well-tended collection of candy 
colored pills. The doctor who had prescribed them — E. G. Hart, M. D., and 
apparently a more reckless character than his prim initials would suggest — 
was a generous fellow, particularly with the amphetamines. Ladies of Mrs 
Corcoran's age usually went in pretty heavily for the Valium and so forth but 
she had enough speed to send a gang of Hell's Angels on a cross-country 
rampage. 


I was nervous. The room smelled like new clothes and perfume; big disco 
mirrors on the wall reproduced our every move in paranoiac multiple-image; 
there was no way out and no possible excuse for being there should anyone 
happen in. I kept an eye on the door while Cloke, with admirable efficiency, 
went swiftly through the bottles. 


Dalmane. Yellow and orange. Darvon. Red and gray. Fiorinal. 
Nembutal. Miltown. I took two from each of the bottles he gave me. 
"What,' he said, 'don't you want more than that?’ 

'I don't want her to miss anything.’ 


‘Shit,’ he said, opening another bottle and pouring half the contents into his 
pocket. "Take what you want. She'll think it was one of her daughters-in-law 
or something. Here, have some of this speed,’ he said, tapping most of the rest 
of the bottle on my palm. 'It's great stuff. Pharmaceutical. During exams you 
can get ten or fifteen dollars a hit for this, easy. 


I went downstairs, the right-hand pocket of my jacket full of ups and the left 
full of downs. Francis was standing at the foot of the steps. 'Listen,' I said, 'do 
you know where Henry is?’ 


"No. Have you seen Charles?’ 


He was half-hysterical. 'What's wrong?’ I said. 


‘He stole my car keys,’ 'What?' 


"He took the keys out of my coat pocket and left. Camilla saw him pulling 
out of the driveway. He had the top down. That car stalls in the rain, anyway, 
but if — shit,’ he said, running a hand through his hair. "You don't know 
anything about it, do you?’ 


'I saw him about an hour ago. With Marion. 


"Yes, I talked to her too. He said he was going out for cigarettes, but that was 
an hour ago. You did see him? You haven't talked to him?’ 


'No.' 
"Was he drunk? Marion said he was. Did he look drunk to you?’ 


Francis looked pretty drunk himself. 'Not very,' I said. 'Come on, help me 
find Henry.’ 


'I told you. I don't know where he is. What do you want him for?’ 
'I have something for him.’ 

"What is it?’ he said in Greek. 'Drugs?’ 

"Yes. 


"Well, give me something, for God's sake,' he said, swaying forward, pop- 
eyed. 


He was far too drunk for sleeping pills. I gave him an Excedrin. 


Thanks,’ he said, and swallowed it with a big sloppy drink of his whiskey. 'I 
hope I die in the night. Where do you suppose he went, anyway? What time is 
it?! 


‘About ten.’ 


"You don't suppose he decided to drive home, do you? Maybe he just took 
the car and went back to Hampden. Camilla said certainly not, not with the 
funeral tomorrow, but I don't know, he's just disappeared. If he really just 
went for cigarettes, don't you think he'd be back by now? I can't imagine 
where else he would have gone. What do you think?’ 


"He'll turn up,’ I said. 'Look, I'm sorry, I've got to go. I'll see you later.' 


I looked all over the house for Henry and found him sitting by himself on an 


army cot, in the basement, in the dark. 


He looked at me out of the corner of his eye, without moving his head. 'What 
is that?’ he said, when I offered him a couple of capsules. 


"Nembutal. Here.’ 

He took them from me and swallowed them without water. 

‘Do you have any more?’ 

"Yes.' 

‘Give them to me. 

"You can't take more than two.' 

‘Give them to me.’ 

I gave them to him. 'I'm not kidding, Henry,’ I said. 'You'd better be careful.’ 


He looked at them, then reached in his pocket for the blue enamel pillbox 
and put them carefully inside it. 'I don't suppose,’ he said, ‘you would go 
upstairs and get me a drink.’ 


"You shouldn't be drinking on top of those pills.’ 
Tve been drinking already.’ 

'I know that.’ 

There was a brief silence. 


Look,’ he said, pushing his glasses up on the bridge of his nose. 'I want a 
Scotch and soda. In a tall glass. Heavy on the Scotch, light on the soda, lots of 
ice, a glass of plain water, no ice, on the side. That's what I want.’ 


Tm not going to get it for you.’ 


‘If you don't go up and get it for me,’ he said, Till just have to go up and get it 
myself.’ 


I went up to the kitchen and got it for him, except I made it a good deal 
heavier on the soda than I knew he wanted me to. 


That's for Henry,’ said Camilla, coming into the kitchen just as I'd finished 
the first glass and was filling the second with water from the tap. 


"Yes.' 

"Where is he?’ 
‘Downstairs. 
"How's he doing?’ 


We were alone in the kitchen. With my eyes on the empty doorway, I told 
her about the lacquer chest. 


'That sounds like Cloke,’ she said, laughing. 'He's really pretty decent, isn't 
he? Bun always said he reminded him of you.' 


I was puzzled and a bit offended by this last. I started to say something about 
it, but instead I set down the glass and r WJ said, 'Who do you talk to on the 
telephone at three in the morning?’ 


"What?’ 


Her surprise seemed perfectly natural. The problem was that she was such an 
expert actress it was impossible to know if it was genuine. 


I held her gaze. She met it unblinking, brows knit, and just when I thought 
she'd been silent a beat too long, she shook her head and laughed again. 
"What's wrong with you?’ she said. 


"What are you talking about?’ 
I laughed too. It was impossible to outfox her at this game. 


Tm not trying to put you on the spot,' I said. ‘But you need 1 to be careful 
what you say on the telephone when Cloke's in your house. 


She looked blank. 'I am careful.’ 

'I hope you are, because he's been listening. 
"He couldn't have heard anything.’ 

"Well, that's not for want of trying.’ 


We stood looking at each other. There was a heart-stopping, ruby-red 
pinprick of a beauty mark just beneath her eye. On an irresistible impulse I 
leaned down and gave her a kiss. 


She laughed. 'What was that for?’ she said. 


My heart — which, thrilled at my daring, had held its breath for a moment or 
two — began suddenly to beat quite wildly. I turned and busied myself with the 
glasses. ‘Nothing,’ I said, 'you just looked pretty,’ and I might have said 
something else had Charles — dripping wet — not burst through the kitchen 
door, Francis hard at his heels. 


"Why didn't you just tell me?' said Francis in an angry whisper. 


He was flushed and trembling. 'Never mind that the seats are soaked, and 
will probably mildew and rot, and that I've got to drive back to Hampden 
tomorrow. But never mind about that. I don't care. What I can't believe is that 
you went up, you deliberately went looking for my coat, you took the keys 
and ' 


Tve seen you leave the top down in the rain before.’ said Charles curtly. He 
was at the counter, his back to Francis, pouring himself a drink. His hair was 
plastered to his head and a small puddle was forming round him on the 
linoleum. 


‘What,’ said Francis, through his teeth. 'I never. 
"Yes you have,' said Charles, without turning around. 
"Name one time.' 


‘Okay. What about that afternoon you and I were in Manchester, and it was 
about two weeks before school started, and we decided to go to the Equinox 
House for ' 


That was a summer afternoon. It was sprinkling.’ 


Tt was not. It was raining hard. You just don't want to talk about that now 
because that was the afternoon you tried to get f me to ' it ‘You're crazy,’ said 
Francis. That doesn't have anything to do with this. It's dark as hell and 
pouring rain and you're drunk out of your skull. It's a miracle you didn't kill 
somebody. Where the hell did you go for those cigarettes, anyway? There's 
not a store around here for ' 


Tm not drunk.’ 
‘Ha, ha. Tell me. Where'd you get those cigarettes? I'd like to know. I bet ' 
'I said I'm not drunk.’ 


"Yeah, sure. I bet you didn't even buy any cigarettes. If you did, they must be 
soaking wet. Where are they, anyway?’ 


"Leave me alone.’ 
"No. Really. Show them to me. I'd like to see these famous —' 


Charles slammed down his glass and spun around. 'Leave me alone,’ he 
hissed. 


It was not the tone of his voice, exactly, as much as the look on his face 
which was so terrible. Francis stared, his mouth fallen slightly open. For about 
ten long seconds there was no sound but the rhythmic tick tick tick of the 
water dripping from Charles's sodden clothes. 


I took Henry's Scorch and soda, lots of ice, and his water, no ice, and walked 
past Francis, out the swinging door and down to the basement. 


It rained hard all night. My nose tickled from the dust in the sleeping bag, 
and the basement floor — which was poured concrete beneath a thin, 
comfortless layer of indoor-outdoor carpeting — made my bones ache 
whichever way I turned. The rain drummed on the high windows, and the 
floodlights, shining through the glass, cast a pattern on the walls as if dark 
rivulets of water were streaming down them from ceiling to floor. 


Charles snored on his cot, his mouth open; Francis grumbled in his sleep. 
Occasionally a car swooshed by in the rain and its headlights would swing 
round momentarily and illuminate the room — the pool table, the snowshoes 
on the wall and the rowing machine, the armchair in which Henry sat, 
motionless, a glass in his hand and the cigarette burning low between his 
fingers. For a moment his face, pale and watchful as a ghost's, would be 
caught in the headlights and then, very gradually, it would slide back into the 
dark. 


In the morning I woke up sore and disoriented to the sound of a loose shutter 
banging somewhere. The rain was falling harder than ever. It lashed in 
rhythmic waves against the windows of the white, brightly lit kitchen as we 
guests sat around the table and ate a silent, cheerless breakfast of coffee and 
Pop Tarts. 


The Corcorans were upstairs, dressing. Cloke and Bram and Rooney drank 
coffee with their elbows on the table and talked in low voices. They were 
freshly showered and shaven, cocky in their Sunday suits but uneasy, too, as if 
they were about to go to court. Francis — puff-eyed, his stiff red hair full of 
absurd cowlicks — was still in his bathrobe. He had got up late and was in a 
state of barely contained outrage because all the hot water in the downstairs 
tank was gone. 


He and Charles were across the table from each other, and took great pains 


to avoid looking in the other's direction. Marion — red-eyed, her hair in hot 
curlers — was sullen and silent, too. 


She was dressed very smartly, in a navy suit, but with fuzzy pink slippers 
over her fleshtone nylons. Every now and then she would reach up and put her 
hands on the rollers to see if they were cooling off. 


Henry, among us, was the only pallbearer — the other five being family 
friends or business associates of Mr Corcoran's. I wondered if the coffin was 
very heavy and, if so, how Henry would manage. Though he emitted a faint, 
ammoniac odor of sweat and Scotch he did not look at all drunk. The pills had 
sunk him into a glassy, fathomless calm. Threads of smoke floated up from a 
filterless cigarette whose coal burned dangerously near his fingertips. It was a 
state which might have seemed a suspiciously narcotic one except that it 
differed so little from his customary manner. 


It was a little after nine-thirty by the kitchen clock. The funeral was set for 
eleven. Francis went off to dress and Marion to take her rollers out. The rest 
of us were still sitting around the kitchen table, awkward and inert, pretending 
to enjoy our second and third cups of coffee when Teddy's wife marched in. 
She was a hard-faced, pretty litigation lawyer who smoked constantly and 
wore her blond hair in a China chop. With her was Hugh's wife: a small, mild- 
mannered woman who looked far too young and frail to have borne as many 
children as she had. By an unfortunate coincidence, both of them were named 
Lisa, which made for a lot of confusion around the house. 


‘Henry,’ said the first Lisa, leaning forward and jamming out her half-smoked 
Vantage so it crooked at a right angle in the ashtray. She was wearing Giorgio 
perfume and far too much of it. "We're driving to the church now to arrange 
the flowers in the chancel and collect the cards before the service starts. Ted's 
mother’ — both Lisas disliked Mrs Corcoran, a feeling which was heartily 
reciprocated — 'said you should drive over with us so that you can meet with 
the pallbearers. Okay?’ 


Henry, the light winking off the steel rims of his glasses, gave no indication 
of having heard her. I was about to kick him under the table when, very 
slowly, he looked up. 


'Why?' he said. 
‘The pallbearers are supposed to meet in the vestibule at ten-fifteen.' 
"Why?' repeated Henry, with Vedic calm. 


'I don't know why. I'm just telling you what she said. This stuff is planned 
out like synchronized swimming or some damn thing. Are you ready to go, or 


do you need a minute?’ 


‘Now, Brandon,’ said Hugh's wife weakly to her little son, who had run into 
the kitchen and was attempting to swing from his mother's arms like an ape. 
‘Please. You're going to hurt Mother. Brandon.’ 


‘Lisa, you shouldn't let him hang all over you like that,' said the first Lisa, 
glancing at her watch. 


‘Please, Brandon. Mother's got to go now. 


‘He's too big to act like that. You know he is. If I were you, I would just take 
him in the bathroom and tear him up.' 


Mrs Corcoran came down about twenty minutes later, in black crepe de 
Chine, riffling through a quilted-leather clutch. "Where is everybody?’ she said 
when she saw only Camilla, Sophie Dearbold and me loafing by the trophy 
case. 


When no one answered her, she paused on the stair, annoyed. 
"Well?' she said. 'Has everybody left? Where's Francis?’ 


'I think he's dressing,’ I said, glad she'd asked something I could answer 
without having to lie. From where she stood on the stairs she could not see 
what the rest of us saw, quite clearly, through the glass doors of the living 
room: Cloke and Bram and Rooney, Charles with them, all of them standing 
around under the sheltered part of the terrace getting stoned. It was odd to see 
Charles of all people smoking pot and the only reason I could think why he 
was doing it was because he thought it would brace him up, the way a stiff 
drink might. If so, I felt certain he was in for a nasty surprise. When I was 
twelve and thirteen I used to get high at school every day — not because I liked 
it, it broke me out in cold sweats and panic — but because in the lower grades 
it was such a fabulous prestige to be thought a pothead, also because I was so 
expert at hiding the paranoiac flulike symptoms it gave me. 


Mrs Corcoran was looking at me as if I'd uttered some Nazi oath. 'Dressing?’ 
she said. 


'I think so.' 
‘Isn't he even dressed by now? What's everybody been doing all morning?’ 


I didn't know what to say. She was drifting down the stairs a step at a time, 
and now that her head was free of the balustrade, she had an unimpeded view 
of the patio doors — rain-splashed glass, oblivious smokers beyond — if she 


chose to look that way. 


We were all transfixed with suspense. Sometimes mothers didn't know what 
pot was when they saw it, but Mrs Corcoran looked like she would know, all 
right. 


She snapped the clutch bag shut and looked around with a sweeping, raptor- 
like gaze — the only thing about her, surely, that could remind me of my 
father, and it did. 


"Well?' she said. 'Would somebody tell him to hurry up?’ 


Camilla jumped up. 'T'll get him, Mrs Corcoran,’ she said, but once she was 
around the corner she scooted over to the terrace door. 


Thank you, dear,’ said Mrs Corcoran. She had found what she wanted — her 
sunglasses — and she put them on. 'I don't know what it is with you young 
people,’ she said. 'I don't mean you in particular, but this is a very difficult 
time and we're all under a great deal of stress and we must try to make things 
go as smoothly as they possibly can.' 


Cloke looked up, bloodshot and uncomprehending, at Camilla's soft rap on 
the glass. Then he looked past her into the living room, and all of a sudden his 
face changed. Shit, I saw him say, noiselessly, and a cloud of smoke escaped 
from his mouth. 


Charles saw, too, and almost choked. Cloke snatched the joint from Bram 
and pinched it out with thumb and forefinger. 


Mrs Corcoran, in big black sunglasses, remained thankfully unaware of this 
drama unfolding behind her back. 'The church is a bit of a drive, you know,’ 
she said as Camilla circled behind her and went to fetch Francis. 'Mack and I 
will go ahead in the station wagon, and you people can follow either us or the 
boys. 


I think you'll have to go in three cars, though maybe you can squeeze into 
two — Don't run in Grandmother's house,’ she snapped at Brandon and his 
cousin Neale, who'd darted past her on the stairs and clattered into the living 
room. They wore little blue suits with snap-on bow ties, and their Sunday 
shoes made a terrific racket on the floor. 


Brandon, panting, dodged behind the sofa. 'He hit me, Grandma.’ 
'He called me a bootywipe.' 


‘Did not.’ 


‘Did too. 

‘Boys,’ she thundered. "You ought to be ashamed of yourselves. 
She paused dramatically, to observe their silent, stricken faces. 

"Your Uncle Bunny is dead and do you know what that means? 


It means that he is gone forever. You will never see him again as long as you 
live.' She glared at them. Today is a very special day,’ she said. 'It is a day for 
remembering him. You ought to be sitting quietly somewhere thinking about 
all the nice things he used to do for you instead of running around and 
scuffing up this pretty new floor that Grandmother just had refinished.' 


There was a silence. Neale kicked sullenly at Brandon. 'One time Uncle 
Bunny called me a bastard,’ he said. 


I wasn't sure if she really didn't hear him or if she chose not to; the fixed 
expression on her face made me think maybe the latter, but then the terrace 
doors slid open and Cloke came in with Charles and Bram and Rooney. 


‘Oh. So there you are,’ said Mrs Corcoran suspiciously. 'What are you doing 
out there in the rain?’ 


"Fresh air,’ said Cloke. He looked really stoned. The tip of a Visine bottle 
stuck out from the handkerchief pocket of his suit. 


They all looked really stoned. Poor Charles was bug-eyed and sweating. This 
was probably more than he'd bargained for: bright lights, too high, having to 
deal with a hostile adult. 


She looked at them. I wondered if she knew. For a moment I thought she'd 
say something, but instead she reached out and grabbed hold of Brandon's 
arm. ‘Well, you should all get a move on,’ she said curtly, leaning down to run 
a hand through his mussed hair. ‘It's getting late and I've been led to expect 
that there might be a little problem with seating.’ 


The church had been built in seventeen-something, according to the National 
Register of Historic Places. It was an age-blacked, dungeonlike building with 
its own rickety little graveyard in the back, set on a rolling country lane. 
When we arrived, damp and uncomfortable from Francis's sodden car seats, 
cars lined the road on both sides, as if for a rural dance or bingo night, sloping 
gently into the grassy ditch. A gray drizzle was falling. We parked near the 
country club, which was down a bit, and hiked the quarter-mile silently, in the 
mud. 


The sanctuary was dim, and stepping inside I was blinded by a dazzle of 
candles. When my eyes cleared I saw iron lanterns, clammy stone floors, 
flowers everywhere. Startled, I noticed that one of the arrangements, quite 
near the altar, was wired in the shape of the number 27. 


'I thought he was twenty-four,’ I whispered to Camilla. 
'No,' she said, 'that's his old football number.’ 


The church was packed. I looked for Henry but didn't see him; saw someone 
I thought was Julian but realized it wasn't when he turned around. For a 
moment we stood there in a knot, confused. There were metal folding chairs 
along the back wall to accommodate the crowd, but then someone spotted a 
half-empty pew and we headed for that: Francis and Sophie, the twins, and 
me. Charles, who stuck close to Camilla, was plainly freaking out. The doomy 
horrorhouse atmosphere of the church was not helping at all and he stared at 
his surroundings with frank terror, while Camilla took his arm and tried to 
nudge him down the row. Marion had disappeared to sit with some people 
who'd driven down from Hampden, and Cloke and Bram and Rooney had 
simply disappeared, somewhere between car and church. 


It was a long service. The minister, who took his ecumenical and — some felt 
— slightly impersonal remarks from Saint Paul's sermon on Love from First 
Corinthians, talked for about half an hour. (‘Didn't you feel that was a very 
inappropriate text?’ said Julian, who had a pagan's gloomy view of death 
coupled with a horror of the non-specific.) Next was Hugh Corcoran (‘He was 
the best little brother a guy could have'); then Bunny's old football coach, a 
dynamic Jaycee type who talked at length of Bunny's team spirit, telling a 
rousing anecdote about how Bunny had once saved the day against a 
particularly tough team from ‘lower' Connecticut. (‘That means black,’ 
whispered Francis.) He wound up his story by pausing and staring at the 
lectern for a count of ten; then he looked up frankly. 'I don't know,' he said, 'a 
whole lot about Heaven. My business is teaching boys to play a game and 
play it hard. Today we're here to honor a boy who's been taken out of the 
game early. But that's not to say that while he was out on the field, he didn't 
give tis all he had. That's not to say he wasn't a winner.’ A long, suspenseful 
pause. 'Bunny Corcoran,’ he said gruffly, 'was a winner.’ 


A long, solitary wail went up from somebody towards the middle of the 
congregation. 


Except in the movies (Knute Rockne, All-American) 1 don't know if I've 
ever seen such a bravura performance. When he sat down, half the place was 
in tears — the coach included. No one paid much attention to the final speaker, 
Henry himself, who went to the podium and read, inaudibly and without 


comment, a short poem by A. E. Housman. 


The poem was called 'With Rue My Heart Is Laden.’ I don't know why he 
chose that particular one. We knew that the Corcorans had asked him to read 
something and I expected that they had trusted him to choose something 
appropriate. It would have been so easy for him to choose something else, 
though, something you would think he would pick, for Christ's sake, from 
Lycidas or the Upanishads or anything, really — certainly not that poem, which 
Bunny had known by heart. He'd been very fond of the corny old poems he'd 
learned in grade school: 'The Charge of the Light Brigade,’ 


In Flanders Fields,’ a lot of strange old sentimental stuff whose authors and 
titles I never even knew. 


The rest of us, who were snobs about such things, had thought this a 
shameful taste, akin to his taste for King Dons and Hostess Twinkies. Quite 
often I had heard Bunny say this Housman aloud — seriously when drunk, 
more mockingly when sober — so that the lines for me were set and hardened 
in the cadence of his voice; perhaps that is why hearing it then, in Henry's 
academic monotone (he was a terrible reader) there with the guttering candles 
and the draft shivering in the flowers and people crying all around, enkindled 
in me such a brief and yet so excruciating pain, like one of those weirdly 
scientific Japanese tortures calibrated to extract the greatest possible misery in 
the smallest space of time. 


It was a very short poem. 

With rue my heart is laden 

For golden friends I had, 

For many a rose-lipt maiden 
And many a lightfoot lad. 

By brooks too broad for leaping 
The lightfoot boys are laid; 

The rose-lipt girls are sleeping 
In fields where roses fade. 


During the closing prayer (overly long) I felt myself swaying, so much so 
that the sides of my new shoes dug in the tender spot beneath my anklebones. 
The air was close; people were crying; there was an insistent buzz which 


came in close to my ear and then receded. For a moment I was afraid I would 
black out. Then I realized the buzz actually came from a large wasp flying in 
erratic darts and circles over our heads. Francis, by flailing at it uselessly with 
the memorial service bulletin, had succeeded in enraging it; it dove towards 
the weeping Sophie's head but, finding her unresponsive, turned in midair and 
lit on the back of the pew to collect its wits. Stealthily Camilla leaned to one 
side and began to slip off» her shoe, but before she could, Charles had killed it 
with a resounding thwack from The Book of Common Prayer. 


The pastor, at a key point in his prayer, started. He opened his eyes and his 
glance fell on Charles, still wielding the guilty prayerbook. 'That they may not 
languish in unavailing grief,'he said in a slightly amplified voice, 'nor sorrow 
as those who have no hope, but through their tears look always up to Thee 
Quickly I bowed my head. The wasp still clung with one black feeler to the 
edge of the pew. I stared down at it and thought of Bunny, poor old Bunny, 
expert killer of flying pests, stalking houseflies with a rolled-up copy of the 
Hampden Examiner. 


Charles and Francis, who weren't speaking before the service, had managed 
somehow to make up during the course of it. After the final amen, in silent, 
perfect sympathy, they ducked into an empty corridor off the side aisle. I 
caught a glimpse of them speeding wordlessly down it before they turned into 
the men's room, Francis stopping for one last nervous glance behind and 
already reaching in his coat pocket for what I knew was there the flat pint 
bottle of something or other I'd seen him take from the glove compartment. 


It was a muddy, black day in the churchyard. The rain had stopped but the 
sky was dark and the wind was blowing hard. 


Someone was ringing the church bell and not doing a very good job of it; it 
clanged unevenly to and fro like a bell at a seance. 


People straggled to their cars, dresses billowing, holding hats to head. A few 
paces in front of me Camilla struggled on tiptoe to pull down her umbrella, 
which dragged her along in little skipping steps — Mary Poppins in her black 
funeral dress. I stepped up to help her, but before I got there the umbrella 
blew inside out. For a moment it had a horrible life of its own, squawking and 
flapping its spines like a pterodactyl; with a sudden sharp cry she let it go and 
immediately it sailed ten feet in the air, somersaulting once or twice before it 
caught in the high branches of an ash tree. 


‘Damn,’ she said, looking up at it and then down at her finger, from which a 
thin seam of blood sprang. "Damn, damn, damn.’ 


"Are you okay?’ 


She stuck the injured finger in her mouth. ‘It's not that,’ she said peevishly, 
glancing up at the branches. "This is my favorite umbrella.’ 


I fished around in my pocket, gave her my handkerchief. She shook it out 
and held it to her finger (flutter of white, blown hair, darkening sky) and as I 
watched time stopped and I was transfixed by a bright knife of memory: the 
sky was the same thundery gray as it had been then, new leaves, her hair had 
blown across her mouth just so... 


(flutter of white) 


(... at the ravine. She'd climbed down with Henry and was back at the top 
before him, the rest of us waiting at the edge, cold wind, jitters, springing to 
hoist her up; dead? is he...? She took a handkerchief, Tom her pocket and 
wiped her muddy hands, not looking at any of us, really, her hair blowing 
back light against the sky and her face a blank for just about any emotion one 
might care to project...) 


Behind us someone said, very loudly, 'Dad?' 


I jumped, startled and guilty. It was Hugh. He was walking briskly, half- 
running, and in a moment had caught up with his father. 'Dad?' he said again, 
placing a hand on his father's slumping shoulder. There was no response. He 
shook him gently. 


Up ahead, the pallbearers (Henry indistinct, somewhere among them) were 
sliding the casket into the open doors of the hearse. 


'Dad,' said Hugh. He was tremendously agitated. 'Dad. You gotta listen to me 
for a sec.' 


The doors slammed. Slowly, slowly, Mr Corcoran turned. He was carrying 
the baby they called Champ but today its presence seemed to offer him little 
comfort. The expression on his big slack face was haunted and lost. He stared 
at his son as if he had never seen him before. 


'Dad,' said Hugh. 'Guess who I just saw. Guess who came. Mr Vanderfeller,' 
he said urgently, pressing his father's arm. 


The syllables of this illustrious name — one which the Corcorans invoked 
with very nearly as much respect as that of God Almighty — had when uttered 
aloud a miraculous effect of healing on Mr Corcoran.'Vanderfeller's here?’ he 
said, looking around. 'Where?' 


This august personage, who loomed large in the collective unconscious of 
the Corcorans, was the head of a charitable foundation — endowed by his even 


more august grandpapa which happened to own a controlling interest in the 
stock of Mr Corcoran's bank. This entailed board meetings, and occasional 
social functions, and the Corcorans had an endless store of ‘delightful’ 
anecdotes about Paul Vanderfeller, of how European he was, what a 
celebrated ‘wit,’ and though the witticisms they found frequent occasion to 
repeat seemed poor things to me (the guards up at the security booth at 
Hampden were cleverer) they made the Corcorans rock with urbane and 
apparently quite sincere laughter. One of Bunny's favorite ways to start a 
sentence had been to let drop, quite casually: 'When Dad was lunching with 
Paul Vanderfeller the other day...» 


And here he was, the great one himself, scorching us all with his rays of 
glory. I glanced in the direction Hugh indicated to his father and saw him — an 
ordinary-looking man with the good-natured expression of someone used to 
being constantly catered to; late forties; nicely dressed; nothing particularly 
‘European’ about him except his ugly eyeglasses and the fact that he was 
considerably below the average height. 


An expression of something very like tenderness spread itself across Mr 
Corcoran's face. Without a word he thrust the baby at Hugh and hurried off 
across the lawn. 


Maybe it was because the Corcorans were Irish, maybe it was that Mr 
Corcoran was born in Boston, but the whole family seemed to feel, somehow, 
that it had a mysterious affinity with the Kennedys. It was a resemblance they 
tried to cultivate especially Mrs Corcoran, with her hairdo and faux-Jackie 
glasses — but it also had some slight physical basis: in Brady and Patrick's 
toothy, too-tanned gauntness there was a shadow of Bobby Kennedy while the 
other brothers, Bunny among them, were built on the Ted Kennedy model, 
much heavier, with little round features bunched in the middle of their faces. 
It would not have been difficult to mistake any of them for minor clan 
members, cousins perhaps. Francis had told me of walking into a fashionable, 
very crowded restaurant in Boston once, with Bunny. There was a long wait, 
and the waiter had asked for a name: 'Kennedy,' 


Bun said briskly, rocking back on his heels, and the next instant half the staff 
was scrambling to clear a table. 


And maybe it was these old associations which were clicking around in my 
mind or maybe it was that the only funerals I had ever seen were televised 
events, affairs of state: in any case, the funeral procession-long, black, rain- 
splashed cars, Mr Vanderfeller's Benrley among them — was linked for me in 
dreamlike fashion to another funeral and another, far more famous motorcade. 


Slowly we rolled along. Open cars of flowers — like convertibles in some 


nightmare Rose Parade — crept behind the curtained hearse. Gladiola, dyed 
chrysanthemum, sprays of palm. The wind was blowing hard, and garish 
petals shook loose and tumbled back among the cars, sticking to the damp 
windshields like bits of confetti. 


The cemetery was on a highway. We pulled over and got out of the Mustang 
(flat clack of car doors) and stood blinking on the littered shoulder. Cars 
whooshed past on the asphalt, not ten feet away. 


It was a big cemetery, windy and flat and anonymous. The stones were laid 
out in rows like tract homes. The uniformed driver of the funeral-home 
Lincoln walked around to open the door for Mrs Corcoran. She was carrying — 
I didn't know why a small bouquet of rosebuds. Patrick offered her an arm and 
she slipped a gloved hand in the crook of his elbow, inscrutable behind her 
dark glasses, calm as a bride. 


The back doors of the hearse were opened and the coffin slid out. Silently, 
the party drifted after it as it was borne aloft into the open field, bobbing 
across the sea of grass like a little boat. 


Yellow ribbons fluttered gaily from the lid. The sky was hostile and 
enormous. We passed one grave, a child's, from which grinned a faded plastic 
jack-o'-lantern. 


A green striped canopy, of the sort used for lawn parties, was set up over the 
grave. There was something vacuous and stupid about it, flapping out there in 
the middle of nowhere, something empty, banal, brutish. We stopped, stood, 
in awkward little groups. Somehow I had thought there would be more than 
this. 


Bits of litter chewed up by the mowers lay scattered on the grass. 

There were cigarette butts, a Twix wrapper, recognizable. 

This is stupid, I thought, with a sudden rush of panic. How did this happen:' 
Traffic washed past up on the expressway. 


The grave was almost unspeakably horrible. I had never seen one before. It 
was a barbarous thing, a blind clayey hole with folding chairs for the family 
teetering on one side and raw dirt heaped on the other. My God, I thought. I 
was starting to see everything, all at once, with a blistering clarity. Why 
bother with the coffin, the awning or any of it if they were just going to dump 
him, shovel the dirt in, go home? Was this all there was to it? To get rid of 
him like a piece of garbage? 


Bun, I thought, oh, Bun, I'm sorry. 


The minister ran through the service fast, his bland face tinted green beneath 
the canopy. Julian was there — 1 saw him now, looking towards the four of us. 
First Francis, and then Charles and Camilla, moved to go stand with him but I 
didn't care, I was in a daze. The Corcorans sat very quietly, hands in laps: how 
can they just sit there? I thought, by that awful pit, do nothing? It was 
Wednesday. On Wednesdays at ten we had Greek Prose Composition and that 
was where we all ought to have been now. 


The coffin lay dumbly by the grave. I knew they wouldn't open it, but I 
wished they would. It was just starting to dawn on me that I would never see 
him again. 


The pallbearers stood in a dark row behind the coffin, like a chorus of elders 
in a tragedy. Henry was the youngest one. He stood there quietly, his hands 
folded before him — big, white, scholarly hands, capable and well-kept, the 
same hands that had dug in Bunny's neck for a pulse and rolled his head back 
and forth on its poor broken stem while the rest of us leaned over the edge, 
breathless, watching. Even from that distance we could see the terrible angle 
of his neck, the shoe turned the wrong way, the trickle of blood from nose and 
mouth. He pulled back the eyelids with his thumb, leaning close, careful not 
to touch the eyeglasses which were skewed on top of Bunny's head. One leg 
jerked in a solitary spasm which quieted gradually to a twitch and then 
stopped. Camilla's wristwatch had a second hand. We saw them silently 
conferring. Climbing up the hill after her, bracing his knee with his palm, he'd 
wiped his hands on his trousers and answered our clamorous whispers — dead? 
is he-? with the brief impersonal nod of a doctor... 


— O Lord we beseech you, that while we lament the departure of our brother 
Edmund Grayden Corcoran your servant out of this life, we bear in mind that 
we are most certainly ready to follow him. Give us grace to make ready for 
that last hour, and protect us against a sudden and unprovided death... 


He hadn't seen it coming at all. He hadn't even understood, there wasn't time. 
Teetering back as if on the edge of the swimming pool: comic yodel, 
windmilling arms. Then the surprised nightmare of falling. Someone who 
didn't know there was such a thing in the world as Death; who couldn't 
believe it even when he saw it; had never dreamed it would come to him. 


Flapping crows. Shiny beetles crawling in the undergrowth. A patch of sky, 
frozen in a cloudy retina, reflected in a puddle on the ground. Yoo-hoo. Being 
and nothingness. 


... , am the Resurrection and the life; he who believeth in Me, even if he die, 


shall live; and whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall never die... 


The pallbearers lowered the coffin into the grave with long, creaking straps. 
Henry's muscles quivered with the effort; his jaw was clenched tight. Sweat 
had soaked through to the back of his jacket. 


I felt in the pocket of my jacket to make sure the painkillers were still there. 
It was going to be a long ride home. 


The straps were pulled up. The minister blessed the grave and then sprinkled 
it with holy water. Dirt and dark. Mr Corcoran, his face buried in his hands, 
sobbed monotonously. The awning rattled in the wind. 


The first spadeful of earth. The thud of it on the hollow lid gave me a sick, 
black, empty feeling. Mrs Corcoran — Patrick on one side, sober Ted on the 
other stepped forward. With a gloved hand she tossed the little bouquet of 
roses into the grave. 


Slowly, slowly, with a drugged, fathomless calm, Henry bent and picked up 
a handful of dirt. He held it over the grave and let it trickle from his fingers. 
Then, with terrible composure, he stepped back and absently dragged the hand 
across his chest, smearing mud upon his lapel, his tie, the starched immaculate 
white of his shirt. 


I stared at him. So did Julian, and Francis, and the twins, with a kind of 
shocked horror. He seemed not to realize he had done anything out of the 
ordinary. He stood there perfectly still, the wind ruffling his hair and the dull 
light glinting from the rims of his glasses. 


Chapter 8 ^ 


My memories of the Corcorans' post-funeral get-together are very foggy, due 
possibly to the handful of mixed painkillers I swallowed on the way there. But 
even morphia could not fully dull the horror of this event. Julian was there, 
which was something of a blessing; he drifted through the party like a good 
angel, making graceful small talk, knowing exactly the right thing to say to 
everyone, and behaving with such heavenly charm and diplomacy towards the 
Corcorans (whom he in fact disliked and vice versa) that even Mrs Corcoran 
was mollified. Besides — the pinnacle of glory as far as the Corcorans were 
concerned — it turned out that he was an old acquaintance of Paul 
Vanderfeller's, and Francis, who happened to be nearby, said he hoped he 
never forgot the expression on Mr Corcoran's face when Vanderfeller 
recognized Julian and greeted him (‘European-style,' as Mrs Corcoran was 
heard explaining to a neighbor) with an embrace and a kiss on the cheek. 


The little Corcorans — who seemed oddly elated by the morning's sad events 
— skidded around in hilarious spirits: throwing croissants, shrieking with 
laughter, chasing through the crowd with a horrible toy that made an 
explosive noise like a fart. The caterers had screwed up as well — too much 
liquor, not enough food, a recipe for certain trouble. Ted and his wife fought 
without stopping. Bram Guernsey was sick on a linen sofa. Mr Corcoran 
swung to and fro between euphoria and the wildest of despairs. 


After a bit of this, Mrs Corcoran went up to the bedroom, and came down 
again with a look on her face that was terrible to see. 


In low tones, she told her husband that there had been ‘a burglary,’ a remark 
which — repeated by a well-meaning eavesdropper to his neighbor — spread 
rapidly around the room and generated a flurry of unwanted concern. When 
had it happened? 


What was missing? Had the police been called? People abandoned their 
conversations and gravitated towards her in a murmuring swarm. She evaded 
their questions masterfully, with a martyred air. No, she said, there was no 
point in calling the police: the missing items were small things, of sentimental 
value, and of no use to anyone but herself. 


Cloke found occasion to leave not long after this. And though no one said 
much about it, Henry too had left. Almost immediately after the funeral he'd 
collected his bags, got in his car, and driven away, with only the most 
perfunctory of goodbyes to the Corcorans and without a word to Julian, who 
was very anxious to talk to him. 'He looks wretched,’ he said to Camilla and 


me (I unresponsive, deep in my Dalmane stupor). 'I believe he should see a 
doctor.’ 


'The last week has been hard on him,’ said Camilla. 


‘Certainly. But I think Henry is a more sensitive fellow than we often give 
him credit for being. In many ways it's hard to imagine that he'll ever get over 
this. He and Edmund were closer than I think you realize.’ He sighed. That 
was a peculiar poem he read, wasn't it? I would have suggested something 
from the Phaedo.' 


Things started to break up around two in the afternoon. We could have 
stayed for supper, could have stayed — if Mr Corcoran's drunken invitations 
held true (Mrs Corcoran's frosty smile behind his back informed us that they 
did not) — indefinitely, friends of the family, sleeping on our very own cots 
down in the basement; welcome to join in the life of the Corcoran household 
and share freely in its daily joys and sorrows: family holidays, babysitting the 
little ones, pitching in occasionally with the household chores, working 
together, as a team (he emphasized) which was the Corcoran way. It would 
not be a soft life — he was not soft with his boys — but it would be an almost 
unbelievably enriching one in terms of things like character, and pluck, and 
fine moral standards, the latter of which he did not expect that many of our 
parents had taken the trouble to teach us. 


It was four o'clock before we finally got away. Now, for some reason, it was 
Charles and Camilla who weren't speaking. They'd fought about something — 
I'd seen them arguing in the yard and all the way home, in the back seat, they 
sat side by side and stared straight ahead, their arms folded across their chests 
in what I am sure they did not realize was a comically identical fashion. 


It felt as if I'd been away longer than I had. My room seemed abandoned and 
small, like it had stood empty for weeks. I opened the window and lay on my 
unmade bed. The sheets smelled musty. It was twilight. 


Finally it was over but I felt strangely let down. I had classes on Monday: 
Greek and French. I hadn't been to French in nearly three weeks and the 
thought of it gave me a twinge of anxiety. 


Final papers. I rolled over on my stomach. Exams. And summer vacation in 
a month and a half, and where on earth was I going to spend it? Working for 
Dr Roland? Pumping gas in Piano? 


I got up and took another Dalmane and lay down again. 


Outside it was nearly dark. Through the walls I could hear my neighbor's 
stereo: David Bowie. 'This is Ground Control to Major Tom...’ 


I stared at the shadows on the ceiling. 


In some strange country between dream and waking, I found myself in a 
cemetery, not the one Bunny was buried in but a different one, much older, 
and very famous — thick with hedges and evergreens, its cracked marble 
pavilions choked with vines. 


I was walking along a narrow flagstone path. As I turned a corner, the white 
blossoms of an unexpected hydrangea — luminous clouds, floating pale in the 
shadows — brushed against my cheek. 


I was looking for the tomb of a famous writer — Marcel Proust, I think, or 
maybe George Sand. Whoever it was, I knew they were buried in that place, 
but it was so overgrown I could hardly see the names on the stones, and it was 
getting dark besides. 


I found myself at the top of a hill in a dark grove of pines. A smudged, 
smoky valley lay far beneath. I turned and looked back the way I'd come: a 
prickle of marble spires, dim mausoleums, pale in the growing darkness. Far 
below, a tiny light — a lantern, maybe, or a flashlight — bobbed towards me 
through the crowd of gravestones. I leaned forward to see more clearly, and 
then was startled by a crash in the shrubbery behind me. 


It was the baby the Corcorans called Champ. It had tumbled the length of its 
body and was trying to stagger to its feet; after a moment it gave up and lay 
still, barefoot, shivering, its belly heaving in and out. It was wearing nothing 
but a plastic diaper and there were long ugly scratches on its arms and legs. I 
stared at it, aghast. The Corcorans were thoughtless but this was 
unconscionable; those monsters, I thought, those imbeciles, they just went off 
and left it here all by itself. 


The baby was whimpering, its legs mottled blue with cold. 


Clutched in one fat starfish of a hand was the plastic airplane which had 
come with its Happy Meal. I bent down to see if it was okay but as I did I 
heard, very near, the wry, ostentatious clearing of a throat. 


What happened next took place in a flash. Looking over my shoulder I had 
only the most fleeting impression of the figure looming behind me, but the 
glimpse I got struck me stumbling backwards, screaming, falling down and 
down and down until at last I hit my own bed, which rushed up from the dark 
to meet me. The jolt knocked me awake. Trembling, I lay flat on my back for 
a moment, then scrambled for the light. 


Desk, door, chair. I lay back, still trembling. Though his features had been 
clotted and ruined, with a thick, scabbed quality I that I did not like to 


remember even with the light on — still, 1 had known very well who it was, 
and in the dream he knew I knew. 


After what we'd been through in the previous weeks, it was no wonder we 
were all a little sick of one another. For the first few days we stayed pretty 
much to ourselves, except in class and in the dining halls; with Bun dead and 
buried, —I suppose, there was much less to talk about, and no reason to stay up 
until four or five in the morning. 


I felt strangely free. I took walks; saw some movies by myself; went to an 
off-campus party on Friday night, where I stood on the back porch of some 
teacher's house and drank beer and heard a girl whisper about me to another 
girl, 'He looks so sad, don't you think?’ It was a clear night, with crickets and a 
million stars. 


The girl was pretty, the bright-eyed, ebullient type I always go for. She 
struck up a conversation, and I could have gone home with her; but it was 
enough just to flirt, in the tender, uncertain way tragic characters do in films 
(shell-shocked veteran or brooding young widower; attracted to the young 
stranger yet haunted by a dark past which she in her innocence cannot share) 
and have the pleasure of watching the stars of empathy bloom in her kind 
eyes; feeling her sweet wish to rescue me from myself (and, oh, my dear, I 
thought, if you knew what a job you'd be taking on, if you only knew!); 
knowing that if I wanted to go home with her, I could. 


Which I did not. Because — no matter what kindhearted strangers thought —1 
was in need of neither company nor comfort. 


All I wanted was to be alone. After the par. ty I didn't go to my room but to 
Dr Roland's office, where I knew no one would think to look for me. At night 
and on weekends it was wonderfully quiet, and once we got back from 
Connecticut I spent a great deal of time there — reading, napping on his couch, 
doing his work and my own. 


At that time of night, even the janitors had left. The building was dark. I 
locked the office door behind me. The lamp on Dr Roland's desk cast a warm, 
buttery circle of light and, after turning the radio on low to the classical 
station in Boston, I settled on the couch with my French grammar. Later, 
when I got sleepy, there would be a mystery novel, a cup of tea if I felt like it. 
Dr Roland's bookshelves glowed warm and mysterious in the lamplight. 
Though I wasn't doing anything wrong, it seemed to me that I was sneaking 
around somehow, leading a secret life which, pleasant though it was, was 
bound to catch up with me sooner or later. 


Between the twins, discord still reigned. At lunch they would sometimes 


arrive as much as an hour apart. I sensed that the fault lay with Charles, who 
was surly and uncommunicative and — as lately was par for the course — 
drinking a little more than was good for him. Francis claimed to know nothing 
about it, but I had an idea he knew more than he was saying. 


I had not spoken to Henry since the funeral nor even seen him. He didn't 
show up at meals and wasn't answering the telephone. At lunch on Saturday, I 
said: 'Do you suppose Henry's all right?’ 


‘Oh, he's fine,’ said Camilla, busy with knife and fork. 
"How do you know?’ 


She paused, the fork in mid-air; her glance was like a light turned suddenly 
into my face. 'Because I just saw him. 


"Where?' 

‘At his apartment. This morning,’ she said, going back to her lunch. 

‘So how is he?' 

‘Okay. A little shaky still, but all right.’ 

Beside her, chin in hand, Charles glowered down at his untouched plate. 


Neither of the twins was at dinner that night. Francis was talkative and in a 
good mood. Just back from Manchester and loaded with shopping bags, he 
showed me his purchases one by one: jackets, socks, suspenders, shirts in half 
a dozen different stripes, a fabulous array of neckties, one of which — a 
greeny-bronze silk with tangerine polka dots — was a present for me. (Francis 
was always generous with his clothes. He gave Charles and me his old suits 
by the armload; he was taller than Charles, and thinner than both of us, and 
we would have them altered by a tailor in town. I still wear a lot of those suits: 
Sulka, Aquascutum, Gieves and Hawkes.) 


He had been to the bookstore, too. He had a biography of Cortes; a 
translation of Gregory of Tours; a study of Victorian murderesses, put out by 
the Harvard University Press. He had also bought a gift for Henry: a corpus of 
Mycenaean inscriptions from Knossos. 


I looked through it. It was an enormous book. There was no text, only 
photograph after photograph of broken tablets with the inscriptions — in 
Linear B — reproduced in facsimile in the bottom. Some of the fragments had 
only a single character. 


"He'll like this,’ I said. 


"Yes, I think he will,’ said Francis. 'It was the most boring book I could find. I 
thought I might drop it off after dinner.’ 


"Maybe I'll come along,’ I said. 

Francis lit a cigarette. "You can if you like. I'm not going in. 
I'm just going to leave it on the porch.’ 

‘Oh, well, then,’ I said, oddly relieved. 


I spent all day Sunday in Dr Roland's office, from ten in the morning on. 
Around eleven that night I realized I'd had nothing to eat all day, nothing but 
coffee and some crackers from the Student Services office, so I got my things, 
locked up, and walked down to see if the Rathskeller was still open. 


It was. The Rat was an extension of the snack bar, with lousy food mostly 
but there were a couple of pinball machines, and a jukebox, and though you 
couldn't buy any kind of a real drink there they would give you a plastic cup 
of watered-down beer for only sixty cents. 


That night it was loud and very crowded. The Rat made me nervous. To 
people like Jud and Frank, who were there every time the doors opened, it was 
the nexus of the universe. They were there now, at the center of an 
enthusiastic table of toadies and hangers-on, playing, with froth-mouthed 
relish, some game which apparently involved their trying to stab each other in 
the hand with a piece of broken glass. 


I pushed my way to the front and ordered a slice of pizza and a beer. While I 
was waiting for the pizza to come out of the oven, I saw Charles, alone, at the 
end of the bar. 


I said hello and he turned halfway. He was drunk; I could see it in the way he 
was sitting, not in an inebriated manner per se but as if a different person — a 
sluggish, sullen one — had occupied his body. 'Oh,' he said. 'Good. It's you.’ 


I wondered what he was doing in this obnoxious place, by himself, drinking 
bad beer when at home he had a cabinet full of the best liquor he could 
possibly want. 


He was saying something I couldn't make out over the music and shouting. 
"What?' I said, leaning closer. 


'I said, could I borrow some money.’ 


"How much?’ 
He did some counting on his fingers. 'Five dollars.’ 


I gave it to him. He was not so drunk that he was able to accept it without 
repeated apologies and promises to repay it. 


'I meant to go to the bank on Friday,’ he said. 

‘It's okay. 

"No, really.’ Carefully, he took a crumpled check from his pocket. 
"My Nana sent me this. I can cash it on Monday no problem. 
‘Don't worry, I said. "What are you doing here?’ 

Felt like going out.’ 

"Where's Camilla?’ 

"Don't know. ' 


He was not so drunk, now, that he couldn't make it home on his own; but the 
Rat didn't close for another two hours, and I didn't much like the idea of his 
staying on by himself. Since Bunny's funeral several strangers — including the 
secretary in the Social Sciences office — had approached me and tried to pick 
me for information. I had frozen them out, a trick I'd learned from Henry (no 
expression, pitiless gaze, forcing intruder to retreat in embarrassment); it was 
a nearly infallible tactic but dealing with these people when you were sober 
was one thing, and quite another if you were drunk. I wasn't drunk, but I didn't 
feel like hanging around the Rat until Charles got ready to leave, either. 


Any effort to draw him away would, I knew, serve only to entrench him 
further; when he was drunk he had a perverse way of always wanting to do 
exactly the opposite of what anyone suggested. 


‘Does Camilla know you're here?' I asked him. 
He leaned over, palm on the bar to brace himself. 'What?' 


I asked him again, louder this time. His face darkened. 'None of her 
business,’ he said, and turned back to his beer. 


My food came. I paid for it and told Charles, ‘Excuse me, I'll be right back.' 


The men's room was in a dank, smelly hallway that ran perpendicular to the 


bar. I turned down it, out of Charles's view, to the pay phone on the wall. 
Some girl was on it, though, talking in German. I waited for ages, and was 
just about to leave when finally she hung up, and I dug in my pocket for a 
quarter and dialed the twins' number. 


The twins weren't like Henry; if they were home, they would generally 
answer the phone. But no one did answer. I dialed again and glanced at my 
watch. Eleven-twenty. I couldn't think where Camilla would be, that time of 
night, unless she was on her way over to get him. 


I hung up the phone. The quarter tinkled into the slot. I pocketed it and 
headed back to Charles at the bar. For a moment I thought he had just moved 
somewhere into the crowd, but after standing there a moment or two I realized 
I wasn't seeing him because he wasn't there. He had drunk the rest of his beer 
and left. 


Hampden, suddenly, was green as Heaven again. Most of the flowers had 
been killed by the snow except the late bloomers, honeysuckle and lilac and 
so forth, but the trees had come back bushier than ever, it seemed, deep and 
dark, foliage so dense that the way that ran through the woods to North 
Hampden was suddenly very narrow, green pushing in on both sides and 
shutting out the sunlight on the dank, buggy path. 


On Monday I arrived at the Lyceum a little early and, in Julian's office, 
found the windows open and Henry arranging peonies in a white vase. He 
looked as if he'd lost ten or fifteen pounds, which was nothing to someone 
Henry's size but still I saw the thinness in his face and even in his wrists and 
hands; it wasn't that, though, but something else, indefinable, that somehow 
had changed since I had seen him last. 


Julian and he were talking — in jocular, mocking, pedantic Latin — like a 
couple of priests tidying the vestry before a mass. 


A dark smell of brewing tea hung strong in the air. 


Henry glanced up. 'Salve, amice,' he said, and a subtle animation flickered in 
his rigid features, usually so locked up, and distant: 'Valesne? Quid est rei?’ 


"You look well,’ I said to him, and he did. 


He inclined his head slightly. His eyes, which had been murky and dilated 
while he was ill, were now the clearest of blues. 


"Benigne diets,’ he said. 'I feel much better.’ 


Julian was clearing away the last of the rolls and jam — he and Henry had had 


breakfast together, quite a large one from the looks of it — and he laughed and 
said something I didn't quite catch, some Horatian-sounding tag about meat 
being good for sorrow. I was glad to see that he seemed quite his bright, 
serene old self. He'd been almost inexplicably fond of Bunny, but strong 
emotion was distasteful to him, and a display of feeling normal by modern 
standards would to him have seemed exhibitionist and slightly shocking: I 
was fairly sure this death had affected him more than he let show. Then again, 
I suspect that Julian's cheery, Socratic indifference to matters of life and death 
kept him from feeling too sad about anything for very long. 


Francis arrived, and then Camilla; no Charles, he was probably in bed with a 
hangover. We all sat down at the big round table. 


‘And now,’ said Julian, when everything was quiet, 'I hope we are all ready to 
leave the phenomenal world and enter into the sublime?’ 


Those days, I took an enormous relish in my new-found freedom. 


Now it appeared that we were safe, a huge darkness had lifted from my 
mind. The world was a fresh and wonderful place to me, green and bracing 
and entirely new, and I looked at it now with fresh new eyes. 


I went on a lot of long walks by myself, through North Hampden, down to 
the Battenkill River. I liked especially going to the little country grocery in 
North Hampden (whose ancient proprietors, mother and son, were said to 
have been the inspiration for a famous and frequently anthologized horror 
story from the 19505) to buy a bottle of wine, and wandering down to the 
riverbank to drink it, then roaming around drunk all the rest of those glorious, 
golden, blazing afternoons — a waste of time, I was behind in school, there 
were papers to write and exams coming up but still I was young; the grass was 
green and the air was heavy with the sound of bees and I had just come back 
from the brink of Death itself, back to the sun and air. Now I was free; and my 
life, which I had thought was lost, stretched out indescribably precious and 
sweet before me. 


On one of those afternoons I wandered by Henry's house and found him in 
his hack yard digging a flower bed. He had on his gardening clothes — old 
trousers, shirtsleeves rolled up past the elbow — and in the wheelbarrow were 
tomato plants and cucumber, flats of strawberry and sunflower and scarlet 
geranium. 


Three or four rosebushes with their roots tied in burlap were propped against 
the fence. 


I let myself in through the side gate. I was quite drunk. ‘Hello,’ 


I said, ‘hello, hello, hello.' 


He stopped and leaned on his shovel. A pale flush of sunburn glowed on the 
bridge of his nose. 


"What are you doing?’ I said. 
‘Putting out some lettuces." 


There was a long silence, in which I noticed the ferns he'd dug up the 
afternoon we killed Bunny. Spleenwort, I remembered him calling them; 
Camilla had remarked on the witchiness of the name. He had planted them on 
the shady side of the house, near the cellar, where they grew dark and foamy 
in the cool. 


I lurched back a bit, caught myself on the gatepost. 'Are you going to stay 
here this summer?’ I said. 


He looked at me closely, dusted his hands on his trousers. 'I think so,' he 
said. 'What about you?’ 


'I don't know,’ I said. I hadn't mentioned it to anyone, but only the day before 
I had put in an application at the Student Services office for an apartment- 
sitting job, in Brooklyn, for a history professor who was studying in England 
over the summer. 


It sounded ideal — a rent-free place to stay in, nice part of Brooklyn, and no 
duties except watering the plants and taking care of a pair of Boston terriers, 
who couldn't go to England because of the quarantine. My experience with 
Leo and the mandolins had made me wary, but the clerk had assured me that 
no, this was different, and she'd shown me a file of letters from happy students 
who had previously held the job. I had never been to Brooklyn and didn't 
know a thing about it but I liked the idea of living in a city — any city, 
especially a strange one liked the thought of traffic and crowds, of working in 
a bookstore, waiting tables in a coffee shop, who knew what kind of odd, 
solitary life I might slip into? Meals alone, walking the dogs in the evenings; 
and nobody knowing who I was. 


Henry was still looking at me. He pushed his glasses up on his nose. 'You 
know, he said, ‘it's pretty early in the afternoon.’ 


I laughed. I knew what he was thinking: first Charles, now me. 
Tm okay,’ I said. 


"Are you?’ 


‘Of course.’ 


He went back to his work, sticking the shovel into the ground, stepping 
down hard on one side of the blade with a khaki-gaitered foot. His suspenders 
made a black X across his back. "Then you can give me a hand with these 
lettuces,’ he said. 'There's another spade in the toolshed.’ 


Late that night — two a. m. — my house chairperson pounded on my door and 
yelled that I had a phone call. Dazed with sleep, I put on my bathrobe and 
stumbled downstairs. 


It was Francis. "What do you want?’ I said. 


‘Richard, I'm having a heart attack,’ I looked with one eye at my house 
chairperson — Veronica, Valerie, I forget her name — who was standing by the 
phone with her arms folded over her chest, head to one side in an attitude of 
concern. I turned my back. "You're all right,' I said into the receiver. 'Go back 
to sleep. 


‘Listen to me.’ His voice was panicky. 'I'm having a heart attack. I think I'm 
going to die. 


"No you're not.’ 


'I have all the symptoms. Pain in the left arm. Tightness in chest. Difficulty 
breathing. 


"What do you want me to do?’ 
'I want you to come over here and drive me to the hospital.’ 
"Why don't you call the ambulance?’ I was so sleepy my eyes kept closing. 


‘Because I'm scared of the ambulance,’ said Francis, but I couldn't hear the 
rest because Veronica, whose ears had pricked up at the word ambulance, 
broke in excitedly. 


‘If you need a paramedic, the guys up at the security booth know CPR,’ she 
said eagerly. They're on call from midnight to six. They also run a van service 
to the hospital. If you want me to I'Il-' 


'I don't need a paramedic,’ I said. Francis was repeating my name frantically 
at the other end. 


"Here I am,' I said. 


‘Richard?’ His voice was weak and breathy. "Who are you talking to? What's 


wrong?’ 
"Nothing. Now listen to me ' 
"Who said something about paramedic?’ 


‘Nobody. Now listen. Listen,’ I said, as he tried to talk over me. 'Calm down. 
Tell me what's wrong.’ 


‘I want you to come over. I feel really bad. I think my heart just stopped 
beating for a moment. I ' 


‘Are drugs involved?’ said Veronica in a confidential tone. 


‘Look,’ I said to her, 'I wish you'd be quiet and let me hear what this person is 
trying to say.’ 


‘Richard?’ said Francis. "Will you just come get me? Please?’ 
There was a brief silence. 
"All right,’ I said, 'give me a few minutes,’ and I hung up the phone. 


At Francis's apartment I found him dressed except for his shoes, lying on his 
bed. 'Feel my pulse,’ he said. 


I did, to humor him. It was quick and strong. He lay there limply, eyelids 
fluttering. "What do you think is wrong with me?’ he said. 


'I don't know,’ I said. He was a bit flushed but he really didn't look that bad. 
Still — though it would be insane, I knew, to mention it at that moment — it 
was possible that he had food poisoning or appendicitis or something. 


‘Do you think I should go into the hospital?’ 

"You tell me. 

He lay there a moment. 'I don't know. I really think I should,’ he said. 
‘All right, then. If it'll make you feel better. Come on. Sit up.’ 

He was not too ill to smoke in the car all the way to the hospital. 


We circled around the drive and pulled up by the wide floodlit entrance 
marked Emergency. I stopped the car. We sat there for a moment. 


"Are you sure you want to do this?’ I said. 


He looked at me with astonishment and contempt. 
"You think I'm faking,’ he said. 


'No I don't,’ I said, surprised; and, to be honest, the thought hadn't occurred 
to me. 'I just asked you a question.’ 


He got out of the car and slammed the door. 


We had to wait about half an hour. Francis filled out his chart and sat 
sullenly reading back issues of Smithsonian magazine. But when the nurse 
finally called his name, he didn't stand up. 


‘That's you,’ I said. 

He still didn't move. 

"Well, go on,'I said. 

He didn't answer. He had a sort of wild look in his eye. 
‘Look here,’ he finally said. 'I've changed my mind.’ 
"What?' 

'I said I've changed my mind. I want to go home.’ 


The nurse was standing in the doorway, listening to this exchange with 
interest. 


‘That's stupid,’ I said to him, irritated. "You've waited this ^ long.’ 1 'T 
changed my mind.’ 


"You were the one who wanted to come.’ 


I knew this would shame him. Annoyed, avoiding my gaze, he slammed 
down his magazine and stalked through the double doors without looking 
back. 


About ten minutes later an exhausted-looking doctor in a scrub shirt poked 
his head into the waiting room. I was the only person there. 


'Hi,' he said curtly. "You with Mr Abernathy?’ 
"Yes,' 'Would you step back with me for a moment, please?’ 


I got up and followed him. Francis was sitting on the edge of an examining 


table, fully clad, bent almost double and looking miserable. 


"Mr Abernathy will not put on a gown,’ said the doctor. 'And he won't let the 
nurse take any blood. I don't know how he expects us to examine him if he 
won't cooperate.’ 


There was a silence. The lights in the examining room were very bright. I 
was horribly embarrassed. 


The doctor walked over to a sink and began to wash his hands. 
"You guys been doing any drugs tonight?’ he said casually. 

I felt my face getting red. 'No,' I said. 

'A little cocaine? Some speed, maybe?’ 

'No.' 


If your friend here took something, it would help a lot if we knew what it 


'Francis,' I said weakly, and was silenced by a glare of hatred: et to, Brute. 


"How dare you,' he snapped. 'I didn't take anything. You know very well I 
didn't.’ 


‘Calm down,’ said the doctor. 'Nobody's accusing you of anything. But your 
behavior is a little irrational tonight, don't you think?’ 


'No,' said Francis, after a confused pause. 
The doctor rinsed his hands and dried them on a towel. 


"No?' he said. 'You come here in the middle of the night saying you're having 
a heart attack and then you won't let anyone near you? How do you expect me 
to know what is wrong with you?’ 


Francis didn't answer. He was breathing hard. His eyes were cast downward 
and his face was a bright pink. 


Tm not a mind reader,’ the doctor said at last. 'But in my experience, 
somebody your age saying they're having a heart attack, it's one of two things. 


"What?' I finally said. 


"Well. Amphetamine poisoning, for one." 


‘It's not that,’ Francis said angrily, glancing up. 

‘All right, all right. Something else it could be is a panic disorder. 
"What's that?’ I said, carefully avoiding looking in Francis's direction. 
‘Like an anxiety attack. A sudden rush of fear. Heart palpitations. 


Trembling and sweating. It can be quite severe. People often think they're 
dying. 


Francis didn't say anything. 
"Well?' said the doctor. 'Do you think that might be it?’ 
'I don't know,’ said Francis, after another confused pause. 


The doctor leaned back against the sink. 'Do you feel afraid a lot?' he said. 
‘For no good reason you can think of?’ 


By the time we left the hospital, it was a quarter after three. 


Francis lit a cigarette in the parking lot. In his left hand he was grinding a 
piece of paper on which the doctor had written the name of a psychiatrist in 
town. 


"Are you mad?' he said when we were in the car. 

It was the second time he had asked. 'No,' I said. 

'I know you arc.' 

The streets were dream-lit, deserted. The car top was down. 


We drove past dark houses, turned onto a covered bridge. The tires thumped 
on the wooden planks. 


‘Please don't be mad at me,’ said Francis. 
I ignored him. 'Are you going to see that psychiatrist?’ I said. 
‘It wouldn't do any good. I know what's bothering me.' 


I didn't say anything. When the word psychiatrist had come up, I had been 
alarmed. I was not a great believer in psychiatry but still, who knew what a 
trained eye might see in a personality test, a dream, even a slip of the tongue? 


'I went through analysis when I was a kid,’ Francis said. He sounded on the 


verge of tears. 'I guess I must've been eleven or twelve. My mother was on 
some kind of Yoga kick and she yanked me out of my old school in Boston 
and packed me off to this terrible place in Switzerland. The Something 
Institute. 


Everyone wore sandals with socks. There were classes in dervish dancing 
and the Kabbalah. All the White Level — that was what they called my grade, 
or form, whatever it was — had to do Chinese Quigong every morning and 
have four hours of Reichian analysis a week. I had to have six. 


"How do you analyze a twelve-year-old kid?’ 


‘Lots of word association. Also weird games they made you play with 
anatomically correct dolls. They'd caught me and a couple of little French 
girls trying to sneak off the grounds — we were half-starved, macrobiotic food, 
you know, we were only trying to get down to the bureau de tabac to buy 
some chocolates but of course they insisted it had somehow been some sort of 
sexual incident. Not that they minded that sort of thing but they liked you to 
tell them about it and I was too ignorant to oblige. 


The girls knew more about such matters and had made up some wild French 
story to please the shrink — menage a trots in some haystack, you can't 
imagine how sick they thought I was for I repressing, this. Though I would've 
told them anything if I thought they'd send me home.' He laughed, without 
much humor. 'God. I remember the head of the Institute asking me once what 
character from fiction I most identified with, and I said Davy Balfour from 
Kidnapped.' 


We were rounding a corner. Suddenly, in the wash of the headlights, a large 
animal loomed in my path. I hit the brakes hard. For half a moment I found 
myself looking through the windshield at a pair of glowing eyes. Then, in a 
flash, it bounded away. 


We sat for a moment, shaken, at a full stop. 
"What was that?' said Francis. 

'I don't know. A deer maybe.’ 

"That wasn't a deer.’ 

"Then a dog.’ 

Tt looked like some kind of a cat to me. 


Actually, that was what it had looked like to me too. 'But it was too big,’ I 


said. 
"Maybe it was a cougar or something,’ 'They don't have those around here." 


'They used to. They called them catamounts. Cat-o-the Mountain. Like 
Catamount Street in town. 


The night breeze was chilly. A dog barked somewhere. There wasn't much 
traffic on that road at night. 


I put the car in gear. 


Francis had asked me not to tell anyone about our excursion to the 
emergency room but at the twins’ apartment on Sunday night I had a little too 
much to drink and I found myself telling the story to Charles in the kitchen 
after dinner. 


Charles was sympathetic. He'd had some drinks himself but not as many as 
me. He was wearing an old seersucker suit which hung very loosely on him — 
he, too, had lost some weight — and a frayed old Sulka tie. 


‘Poor Francois,’ he said. 'He's such a fruitcake. Is he going to see that shrink?’ 
'I don't know.’ 


He shook a cigarette from a pack of Lucky Strikes that Henry had left on the 
counter. 'If I were you,' he said, tapping the cigarette on the inside of his wrist 
and craning to make sure that no one was in the hall, 'if I were you, I would 
advise him not to mention this to Henry. 


I waited for him to continue. He lit the cigarette and blew out a cloud of 
smoke. 


'I mean, I've been drinking a bit more than I should,’ he said quietly. ‘I'm the 
first to admit that. But my God, I was the one who had to deal with the cops, 
not him. I'm the one who has to deal with Marion, for Christ sake. She calls 
me almost every night. 


Let him try talking to her for a while and see how he feels... If I wanted to 
drink a bottle of whiskey a day I don't see what he could say about it. I told 
him it was none of his business, and none of his business what you did, 
either.’ 


The?’ 


He looked at me with a blank, childish expression. Then he laughed. 


‘Oh, you hadn't heard?’ he said. 'Now it's you, too. Drinking too much. 
Wandering around drunk in the middle of the day. 


Rolling down the road to ruin.’ 


I was startled. He laughed again at the look on my face but then we heard 
footsteps and the tinkle of ice in an advancing cocktail — Francis. He poked 
his head into the doorway and began to gabble good-naturedly about 
something or other, and after a few minutes we picked up our drinks and 
followed him back to the living room. 


That was a cozy night, a happy night; lamps lit, sparkle of glasses, rain 
falling heavy on the roof. Outside, the treetops tumbled and tossed, with a 
foamy whoosh like club soda bubbling up in the glass. The windows were 
open and a damp cool breeze swirled through the curtains, bewitchingly wild 
and sweet. 


Henry was in excellent spirits. Relaxed, sitting in an armchair with his legs 
stretched out in front of him, he was alert, well rested, quick with a laugh or a 
clever reply. Camilla looked enchanting. 


She wore a narrow sleeveless dress, salmon-colored, which exposed a pair of 
pretty collarbones and the sweet frail vertebrae at the base of her neck — 
lovely kneecaps, lovely ankles, lovely bare, strong-muscled legs. The dress 
exaggerated her spareness of body, her unconscious and slightly masculine 
grace of posture; I loved her, loved the luscious, stuttering way she would 
blink while telling a story, or the way (faint echo of Charles) that she held a 
cigarette, caught in the knuckles of her bitten-nailed fingers. 


She and Charles seemed to have made up. They didn't talk much, but the old 
silent thread of twinship seemed in place again. They perched on the arms of 
each other's chairs, and fetched drinks back and forth (a peculiar twin-ritual, 
complex and charged with meaning). Though I did not fully understand these 
observances, they were generally a sign that all was well. She, if anything, 
seemed the more conciliatory party, which seemed to disprove the hypothesis 
that he was at fault. 


The mirror over the fireplace was the center of attention, a cloudy old mirror 
in a rosewood frame; nothing remarkable, they'd got it at a yard sale, but it 
was the first thing one saw when one stepped inside and now even more 
conspicuous because it was cracked — a dramatic splatter that radiated from 
the center like a spider's web. How that had happened was such a funny story 
that Charles had to tell it twice, though it was his reenactment of it that was 
funny, really — spring housecleaning, sneezing and miserable with dust, 
sneezing himself right off his stepladder and landing on the mirror, which had 


just been washed and was on the floor. 


"What I don't understand,’ said Henry, 'is how you got it back up again 
without the glass falling out.’ 


It was a miracle. I wouldn't touch it now. Don't you think it looks kind of 
wonderful?’ 


Which it did, there was no denying it, the spotty dark glass shattered like a 
kaleidoscope and refracting the room into a hundred pieces. 


Not until it was time to leave did I discover, quite by accident, how the 
mirror had actually been broken. I was standing on the hearth, my hand 
resting on the mantel, when I happened to look into the fireplace. The 
fireplace did not work. It had a screen and a pair of andirons, but the logs that 
lay across them were furry with dust. But now, glancing down, I saw 
something else: silver sparkles, bright-needled splinters from the broken 
mirror, mixed with large, unmistakable shards of a gold-rimmed highball 
glass, the twin of the one in my own hand. They were heavy old glasses, an 
inch thick at the bottom. Someone had thrown this one hard, with a pretty 
good arm, from across the room, hard enough to break it to pieces and to 
shatter the looking-glass behind my head. 


Two nights later, I was woken again by a knock at my door. 


Confused, in a foul temper, I switched on the lamp and reached blinking for 
my watch. It was three o'clock. 'Who's there?’ I said. 


Henry,’ came the surprising reply. 


I let him in, somewhat reluctantly. He didn't sit down. 'Listen,' he said. 'T'm 
sorry to disturb you, but this is very important. I have a favor to ask of you.’ 


His tone was quick and businesslike. It alarmed me. I sat down on the edge 
of my bed. 


‘Are you listening to me?’ 
"What is it?' I said. 


‘About fifteen minutes ago I got a call from the police. Charles is in jail. He 
has been arrested for drunk driving. I want you to go down and get him out.' 


A prickle rose on the nape of my neck. 'What?' I said. 


"He was driving my car. They got my name from the registration sticker. I 
have no idea what kind of condition he's in.' He reached into his pocket and 


handed me an unsealed envelope. 'I expect it's going to cost something to get 
him out, I don't know what.' 


I opened the envelope. Inside was a check, blank except for Henry's 
signature, and a twenty-dollar bill. 


'I already told the police that I lent him the car,’ said Henry. 


‘If there's any question about that, have them call me.' He was standing by 
the window, looking out. 'In the morning I'll get in touch with a lawyer. All I 
want you to do is get him out of there as soon as you can.' 


It took a moment or two for this to sink in. 

"What about the money?’ I said at last. 

"Pay them whatever it costs,’ 'I mean this twenty dollars.’ 

"You'll have to take a taxi. I took one over here. It's waiting downstairs.’ 


There was a long silence. I still wasn't awake. I was sitting there in just an 
undershirt and a pair of boxer shorts. 


While I dressed, he stood at the window looking out at the dark meadow, 
hands clasped behind his back, oblivious to the jangle of clothes-hangers and 
my clumsy, sleep-dazed fumbling through the bureau drawers — serene, 
preoccupied; lost, apparently, in his own abstract concerns. 


It wasn't until I'd dropped Henry off and was being driven, at a rapid clip, 
towards the dark center of town, that I realized how poorly I had been 
apprised of the situation I was heading into. 


Henry hadn't told me a thing. Had there been an accident? For that matter, 
was anyone hurt? Besides, if this was such a big deal — and it was Henry's car, 
after all — why wasn't he coming, too? 


A lone traffic light rocked on a wire over the empty intersection. 
The jail, in Hampden town, was in an annex of the courthouse. 


It was also the only building in the square that had any lights on that time of 
night. I told the taxi driver to wait and went inside. 


Two policemen were sitting in a large, well-lit room. There were many filing 
cabinets, and metal desks behind partitions; an old-fashioned water cooler; a 
gumball machine from the Civitan Club (‘Your Change Changes Things’). I 
recognized one of the policemen — a fellow with a red moustache — from the 


search parties. The two of them were eating fried chicken, the sort you buy 
from under heat lamps in convenience stores, and watching ‘Sally Jessy 
Raphael’ on a portable black-and-white TV. 


'Hi,' I said. 
They looked up. 
'I came to see about getting my friend out of jail.’ 


The one with the red moustache wiped his mouth on a paper napkin. He was 
big and pleasant-looking, in his thirties. "That's Charles Macaulay, I bet,’ he 
said. 


He said this as if Charles were an old friend of his. Maybe he was. Charles 
had spent a lot of time down here when the stuff with Bunny was going on. 
The cops, he said, had been nice to him. They'd sent out for sandwiches, 
bought him Cokes from the machine. 


"You're not the guy I talked to on the phone,’ said the other policeman. He 
was large and relaxed, about forty, with gray hair and a froglike mouth. 'Is 
that your car out there?’ 


I explained. They ate their chicken and listened: big, friendly guys, big 
police.385 on their hips. The walls were covered in government-issue posters: 
fight birth defects, hire veterans, REPORT MAIL FRAUD. 


"Well, you know, we can't let you have the car,' said the policeman with the 
red moustache. 'Mr Winter is going to have to come down here and pick it up 
himself.’ 


'I don't care about the car. I just want to get my friend out of jail.’ 


The other policeman looked at his watch. "Well,' he said, 'come back in about 
six hours, then.' 


Was he joking? 'I have the money,' I said. 


"We can't set bail. The judge will have to do that at the arraignment. Nine 
o'clock in the morning.’ 


Arraignment? My heart pumped. What the hell was that? 
The cops were looking at me blandly as if to say, 'Is that all?’ 


‘Can you tell me what happened?’ I said. 


"What?' 
My voice sounded flat and strange to me. 'What exactly did he do?’ 


‘State trooper pulled him over out on Deep Kill Road,’ said the gray-haired 
policeman. He said it as if he were reading it. 'He was obviously intoxicated. 
He agreed to a Breathalyzer and failed it when it was administered. The 
trooper brought him down here and we put him in the lock-up. That was about 
two-twenty five a. m.' 


Things still weren't clear, but for the life of me I couldn't think of the right 
questions to ask. Finally I said, 'Can I see him?’ 


‘He's fine, son,' said the policeman with the red moustache. 
"You can see him first thing in the morning.’ 


All smiles, very friendly. There was nothing more to say. I thanked them and 
left. 


When I got outside the cab was gone. I still had fifteen dollars from Henry's 
twenty but to call another cab I'd have to go back inside the jail and I didn't 
want to do that. So I walked down Main Street to the south end, where there 
was a pay phone in front of the lunch counter. It didn't work. 


So tired I was almost dreaming, I walked back to the square past the post 
office, past the hardware store, past the movie theater with its dead marquee: 
plate glass, cracked sidewalks, stars. Mountain cats in bas-relief prowled the 
friezes of the public library. I walked a long way, till the stores got sparse and 
the road was dark, walked on the deep singing shoulder of the highway till I 
got to the Greyhound bus station, sad in the moonlight, the first glimpse I'd 
ever had of Hampden. The terminal was closed. I sat outside, on a wooden 
bench beneath a yellow light bulb, waiting for it to open so I could go in and 
use the phone and have a cup of coffee. 


The clerk — a fat man with lifeless eyes — came to unlock the place at six. We 
were the only people there. I went into the men's room and washed my face 
and had not one cup of coffee but two, which the clerk sold me grudgingly 
from a pot he'd brewed on a hot plate behind the counter. 


The sun was up, it was hard to see much through the grime streaked 
windows. Defunct timetables papered the walls; cigarette butts and chewing 
gum were stomped deep into the linoleum. The doors of the phone booth were 
covered in finger 4 prints. I closed them behind me and dialed Henry's 
number, half-expecting he wouldn't answer but to my surprise he did, on the 
second ring. 


"Where are you? What's the matter?’ he said. 

I explained what had happened. Ominous silence on the other end. 
"Was he in a cell by himself?’ he said at last. 

'I don't know.’ 

"Was he conscious? I mean, could he talk?’ 

'I don't know.’ 

Another long silence. 


Look,’ I said, ‘he's going before the judge at nine. Why don't you meet me at 
the courthouse.’ 


Henry didn't answer for a moment. Then he said: 'It's best if you handle it. 
There are other considerations involved.’ 


‘If there are other considerations I'd appreciate knowing what they are.’ 


‘Don't be angry,’ he said quickly. ‘It's just that I've had to deal with the police 
so much. They know me already, and they know him Coo. Besides' — he 
paused — «I am afraid that I'm the last person Charles wants to see,' 'And why 
is that?’ 


‘Because we quarreled last night. It's a long story,’ he said as I tried to 
interrupt. 'But he was very upset when I saw him last. 


And of all of us, I think you're on the best terms with him at the moment.’ 
"Hmph, 'I said, though secretly I was mollified. 


‘Charles is very fond of you. You know that. Besides, the police don't know 
who you are. I don't think they'll be likely to associate you with that other 
business.’ 


'I don't see that it matters at this point.' 
'I am afraid that it does matter. More than you might think.' 


There was a silence, during which I felt acutely the hopelessness of ever 
trying to get to the bottom of anything with Henry. 


He was like a propagandist, routinely withholding information, leaking it 
only when it served his purposes. 'What are you trying to say to me?’ I said. 


"Now's not the time to discuss it.' 


‘If you want me to go down there, you'd better tell me what you're talking 
about.’ 


When he spoke, his voice was crackly and distant. 'Let's just say that for a 
while things were much more touch-and-go than you realized. Charles has had 
a hard time. It's no one's fault really but he's had to shoulder more than his 
share of the burden.’ 


Silence. 
'I am not asking much of you.' 
Only that I do what you tell me, I thought as I hung up the telephone. 


The courtroom was down the hall from the cells, through a pair of swinging 
doors with windows at the top. It looked very much like what I'd seen of the 
rest of the courthouse, circa 1950 or so, with pecky linoleum tiles and 
paneling that was yellowed and sticky-looking with honey-colored varnish. 


I had not expected so many people would be there. There were two tables 
before the judge's bench, one with a couple of state troopers, the other with 
three or four unidentified men; a court reporter with her funny little 
typewriter; three more unidentified men in the spectators' area, sitting well 
apart from each other, as well as a poor haggard lady in a tan raincoat who 
looked like she was getting beat up by somebody on a pretty regular basis. 


We rose for the judge. Charles's case was called first. 


He padded through the doors like a sleepwalker, in his stocking feet, a court 
officer following close behind him. His face was blurry and thick. They'd 
taken his belt and tie as well as his shoes and he looked a little like he was in 
his pajamas. 


The judge peered down at him. He was sour-faced, about sixty, with a thin 
mouth and big meaty jowls like a bloodhound's. 


"You have an attorney?’ he said, in a strong Vermont accent. 
'No, sir,’ said Charles. 

"Wife or parent present?’ 

'No, sir. 


‘Can you post bail?’ 


‘No, sir,’ Charles said. He looked sweaty and disoriented. 


I stood up. Charles didn't see me but the judge did. 'Are you here to post bail 
for Mr Macaulay?’ he said. 


"Yes, I am.’ 


Charles turned to stare, lips parted, his expression as blank and trancelike as 
a twelve-year-old's. 


‘It'll be five hundred dollars you can pay it at the window down the hall to 
your left,’ said the judge in a bored monotone. 


"You'll have to appear again in two weeks and I suggest you bring a lawyer. 
Do you have a job for which you need your vehicle?’ 


One of the shabby middle-aged men at the front spoke up. 
It's not his car, Your Honor.' 
The judge glowered at Charles, suddenly fierce. 'Is that correct?’ he said. 


The owner was contacted. A Henry Winter. Goes to school up at the college. 
He says he lent the vehicle to Mr Macaulay for the evening.’ 


The judge snorted. To Charles he said gruffly: "Your license is suspended 
pending resolution and have Mr Winter here on the twenty-eighth.' 


The whole business was amazingly quick. We were out of the courthouse by 
ten after nine. 


The morning was damp and dewy, cold for May. Birds chattered in the black 
treetops. I was reeling with fatigue. 


Charles hugged himself. ‘Christ, it's cold,’ he said. 


Across the empty streets, across the square, they were just pulling the blinds 
up at the bank. "Wait here,’ I said. Till go call a cab.’ 


He caught me by the arm. He was still drunk, but his night of boozing had 
done more damage to his clothes than to anything else; his face was fresh and 
flushed as a child's. 'Richard,' he said. 


"What?’ 


"You're my friend, aren't you?’ 


I was in no mood to stand around on the courthouse steps and listen to this 
sort of thing. 'Sure,' I said, and tried to disengage my arm. 


But he only clutched me tighter. 'Good old Richard,’ he said. «I know you 
are. I'm so glad it was you who came. I just want you to do me this one little 
favor.’ 


"What's that?’ 
‘Don't take me home.’ 
"What do you mean?’ 


'Take me to the country. To Francis's. I don't have the key but Mrs Hatch 
could let me in or I could bust a window or something — no, listen. Listen to 
this. I could get in through the basement. I've done it millions of times. Wait,' 
he said as I tried to interrupt again. ‘You could come, too. You could swing by 
school and get some clothes and ' 


"Hold on,' I said, for the third time. 'I can't take you anywhere. 
I don't have a car.’ 


His face changed, and he let go my arm. 'Oh, right,’ he said with sudden 
bitterness. "Thanks a lot.' 


‘Listen to me. I can't. I don't have a car. I came down here in a taxicab. ' 
"We can go in Henry's.’ 
"No we can't. The police took the keys.’ 


His hands were shaking. He ran them through his disordered hair. "Then 
come home with me. I don't want to go home by myself.’ 1 'All right,’ I said. I 
was so tired I was seeing spots. 'All right. j| Just wait. I'll call a cab." 


"No. No cab,’ he said, lurching backwards. 'I don't feel so hot. 
I think I'd rather walk.’ 


This walk, from the courthouse steps to Charles's apartment in North 
Hampden, was not an inconsiderable one. It was three miles, at least. A good 
portion of it lay along a stretch of highway. 


Cars whooshed past in a rush of exhaust. I was dead tired. My head ached 
and my feet were like lead. But the morning air was cool and fresh and it 
seemed to bring Charles around a little. 


About halfway, he stopped at the dusty roadside window of a Tastee Freeze, 
across the highway from the Veterans Hospital, and bought an ice-cream 
soda. 


Our feet crunched on the gravel. Charles smoked a cigarette and drank his 
soda through a red-and-white-striped straw. 


Blackflies whined around our ears. 

‘So you and Henry had an argument,' I said, just for something to say. 
"Who told you? Him?' 

"Yes. 


'I couldn't remember. It doesn't matter. I'm tired of him telling me what to 
do. 


"You know what I wonder,' I said. 

"What?' 

"Not why he tells us what to do. But why we always do what he says.' 
"Beats me,’ said Charles. 'It's not as if much good has come of it.’ 

‘Oh, I don't know.’ 


‘Are you kidding? The idea of that fucking bacchanal in the first place — who 
thought of that? Whose idea was it to take Bunny to Italy? Who the hell wrote 
that diary and left it lying around? The son of a bitch. I blame every bit of this 
on him. 


Besides, you have no idea how close they were to finding us out.’ 
"Who?' I said, startled. "The police?’ 


The people from the FBI. There was a lot towards the end we didn't tell the 
rest of you. Henry made me swear not to tell.’ 


"Why? What happened?’ 


He threw down his cigarette. "Well, I mean, they had it confused,' he said. 
'They thought Cloke was mixed up in it, they thought a lot of things. It's 
funny. We're so used to Henry. We don't realize sometimes how he looks to 
other people. 


"What do you mean?’ 


‘Oh, I don't know. I can think of a million examples.' He laughed sleepily. 'I 
remember last summer, when Henry was so gung-ho about renting a 
farmhouse, driving with him to a realtor's office upstate. It was perfectly 
straightforward. He had a specific house in mind — big old place built in the i 
Soos, way out on some dirt road, tremendous grounds, servants' quarters, the 
whole bit. He even had the cash in hand. They must've talked for two hours. 
The realtor called up her manager at home and asked him to come down to the 
office. The manager asked Henry a million questions. Called every one of his 
references. Everything was in order but even then they wouldn't rent it to him.' 


‘Why?’ 


He laughed. "Well, Henry looks a bit too good to be true, doesn't he? They 
couldn't believe someone his age, a college student, would pay so much for a 
place that big and isolated, just to live all by himself and study the Twelve 
Great Cultures.’ 


"What? They thought he was some kind of a crook?’ 


'They thought he wasn't entirely above-board, let's put it that way. 
Apparently the men from the FBI thought the same thing. 


They didn't think he killed Bunny, but they thought he knew something he 
wasn't telling. Obviously there had been a disagreement in Italy. Marion knew 
that, Cloke knew it, even Julian did. 


They even tricked me into admitting it, though I didn't tell that to Henry. If 
you ask me, I think what they really thought was that he and Bunny had some 
money sunk in Cloke's drug-dealing business. That trip to Rome was a big 
mistake. They could've done it inconspicuously but Henry spent a fortune, 
throwing money around like crazy, they lived in a palazzo, for Christ sake. 


People remembered them everywhere they went. I mean, you know Henry, 
that's just the way he is but you have to look at it from their point of view. 
That illness of his must've looked pretty suspicious, too. Wiring a doctor in 
the States for Demerol. Plus those tickets to South America. Putting them on 
his credit card was about the stupidest thing he ever did." 


They found out about that?’ I said, horrified. 


‘Certainly. When they suspect somebody is dealing drugs, the financial 
records are the first thing they check — and good God, of all places, South 
America. Luckily Henry's dad really does own some property down there. 
Henry was able to cook up something fairly plausible — not that they believed 


him; it was more a matter of their not being able to disprove it.’ 
‘But I don't understand where they got this stuff about drugs. 


‘Imagine how it looked to them. On one hand, there was Cloke. The police 
knew he was dealing drugs on a pretty substantial scale; they also figured he 
was probably the middleman for somebody a lot bigger. There was no 
obvious connection between that and Bunny, but then there was Bunny s best 
friend, with all this money, they can't tell quite where it's coming from. 


And during those last months Bunny was throwing around plenty of money 
himself. Henry was giving it to him, of course, but they didn't know that. 
Fancy restaurants. Italian suits. Besides. 


Henry just looks suspicious. The way he acts. Even the way he dresses. He 
looks like one of those guys with horn-rimmed glasses and armbands in a 
gangster movie, you know, the one who cooks the books for Al Capone or 
something.’ He lit another cigarette. 'Do you remember the night before they 
found Bunny's body? he said. 'When you and I went to that awful bar, the one 
with the TV, and I got so drunk?’ 


'Yes.' 


That was one of the worst nights of my life. It looked pretty bad for both of 
us. Henry was almost sure he was going to be arrested the next day.’ 


I was so appalled that for a moment I couldn't speak. 'Why, for God's sake?’ I 
said at last. 


He drew deeply on his cigarette. The FBI men came to see him that 
afternoon,’ he said. 'Not long after they'd taken Cloke into custody. They told 
Henry they had enough probable cause to arrest half a dozen people, including 
himself, either for conspiracy or withholding evidence.’ 


‘Christ!’ I said, dumbfounded. 'Haifa dozen people? Who?’ 


'I don't know exactly. They might've been bluffing but Henry was worried 
sick. He warned me they'd probably be coming over to my place and I just had 
to get out of there, I couldn't sit around waiting for them. He made me 
promise not to tell you. Even Camilla didn't know.’ 


There was a long pause. 
‘But they didn't arrest you,' I said. 


Charles laughed. I noticed that his hands still shook a little. 'I think we have 


dear old Hampden College to thank for that,’ he said. 'Of course, a lot of the 
stuff didn't tie up; they figured that out from talking to Cloke. But still they 
knew they weren't getting the truth and they probably would've kept after it if 
the college had been a little more cooperative. Once Bunny's body was found, 
though, the administration just wanted to hush it up. 


Too much bad publicity. Freshman applications had gone down something 
like twenty percent. And the town police — whose business it was, really — are 
very cooperative about such things. 


Cloke was in a lot of trouble, you know — some of that drug stuff was 
serious, they could've thrown him in jail. But he got off with academic 
probation and fifty hours of community service. It didn't even go on his school 
record.’ 


It took me some moments to digest this. Cars and trucks whooshed past. 


After a while Charles laughed again. 'It's funny,’ he said, pushing his fists 
deep in his pockets. 'We thought we were putting our ace man up front but if 
one of the rest of us had handled it it would've been much better. If it had been 
you. Or Francis. Even my sister. We could have avoided half of this.' 


It doesn't matter. It's over now.’ 


"No thanks to him. I was the one who had to deal with the police. He takes 
the credit, but it was me who actually had to sit around that goddamned 
station all hours drinking coffee and trying to make them like me, you know, 
trying to convince them we were all just a bunch of regular kids. Same with 
the FBI, and that was even worse. Being the front for everybody, you know, 
always on guard, having to say exactly the right thing and doing my best to 
size up things from their point of view, and you had to hit exactly the right 
note with these people, too, you couldn't drop it for a second, trying to be all 
communicative and open yet concerned, too, you know, and at the same time 
not at all nervous, though I could hardly pick up a cup without being afraid of 
spilling it and a couple of times I was so panicky I thought I was just going to 
black out or break down or something. Do you know how hard that was? Do 
you think Henry would lower himself to do something like that? No. It was all 
right, of course, for me to do it but he couldn't be bothered. Those people had 
never seen anything like Henry in their lives. Ill tell you the sort of thing he 
worried about. Like if he was carrying around the right book, if Homer would 
make a better impression than Thomas Aquinas. He was like something from 
another planet. If he was the only one they'd had to deal with he would have 
landed us all in the gas chamber.’ 


A lumber truck rattled past. 


‘Good God,' I finally said. I was quite shaken. 'I'm glad I didn't know.’ 


He shrugged. "Well, you're right. It all came out okay. But I still don't like the 
way he tries to lord it over me.' 


We walked for a long time without saying anything. 
‘Do you know where you're going to spend the summer?’ said Charles. 


'I haven't thought about it much,' I said. I hadn't heard anything about the 
situation in Brooklyn, which tended to make me think it had fallen through. 


I'm going to Boston,’ Charles said. 'Francis's great-aunt has an apartment on 
Marlborough Street. Just a few doors from the Public Garden. She goes to the 
country in the summer and Francis said if I wanted to stay there, I could.’ 


‘Sounds nice.’ 
‘It's a big place. If you wanted, you could come too.' 
"Maybe.' 


"You'd like it. Francis will be in New York but he'll come up sometimes. 
Have you ever been to Boston?’ 


'No.' 
"We'll go to the Gardner Museum. And the piano bar at the Ritz.’ 


He was telling me about a museum they had at Harvard, some place where 
they had a million different flowers all made of colored glass, when all of a 
sudden, with alarming swiftness, a yellow Volkswagen swooped from the 
opposite lane and ground to a stop beside us. 


It was Judy Poovey's friend Tracy. She rolled down her window and gave us 
a brilliant smile. 'Hi, guys,’ she said. "Want a ride?’ 


She dropped us off at Charles's place. It was ten o'clock. Camilla wasn't 
home. 


'God,' said Charles, shouldering off his jacket. It fell, in a heap, on the floor. 
"How do you feel?’ 
‘Drunk.’ 


"Want some coffee?’ 


‘There's some in the kitchen,’ Charles said, yawning and running a hand 
through his hair. 'Mind if I have a bath?’ 


'Go ahead.’ 
TIl be out in a minute. That cell was filthy. I think I might have fleas.’ 


He was more than a minute. I could hear him sneezing, running the hot and 
cold taps, humming to himself. I went into the kitchen and poured myself a 
glass of orange juice and put some raisin bread in the toaster. 


While looking through the cabinet for coffee, I found a half-full jar of 
Horlick's malted milk. The label stared at me like a reproach. 


Bunny was the only one of us who ever drank malted milk. 
I pushed it to the rear of the cabinet, behind a jug of maple syrup. 


The coffee was ready and I was on my second batch of toast when I heard a 
key in the lock, the front door opening. Camilla stuck her head into the 
kitchen. 


"Hi, you,’ she said. Her hair was untidy and her face pale and watchful; she 
looked like a little boy. 


"Hi yourself. Want some breakfast?’ 
She sat down at the table beside me. 'How did it go?’ she said. 


I told her. She listened attentively, reached out and took a triangle of 
buttered toast from my plate and ate it as she listened. 


'Is he all right?’ she said. 
I didn't know exactly how she meant it, ‘all right.’ 
‘Sure,’ I said. 


There was a long silence. Very faintly, on a downstairs radio, a sprightly 
female voice sang a song about yogurt, backed by a chorus of mooing cows. 


She finished her toast and got up to pour herself some coffee. 
The refrigerator hummed. I watched her rummage in the cabinet for a cup. 


"You know,' I said, 'you ought to throw away that jar of malted milk you 
have in there.’ 


It was a moment before she answered. 'I know,’ she said. 'In the closet there's 
a scarf he left the last time he was here. I keep running across it. It still smells 
like him.’ 


"Why don't you get rid of it?’ 


I keep hoping I won't have to. I hope one day I'll open the closet door and 
it'll be gone. 


'I thought I heard you,' said Charles, who had been standing in the kitchen 
door for I didn't know how long. His hair was wet and all he had on was a 
bathrobe and in his voice was still a trace of that liquory thickness I knew so 
well. 'I thought you were in class.' 


‘Small class. Julian let us out early. How do you feel?’ 


‘Fabulous,’ said Charles, padding into the kitchen, his moist feet tracking 
prints that evaporated instantly on the shiny, tomato-red linoleum. He came 
up behind her and laid his hands on her shoulders; bending low, he put his lips 
close to the nape of her neck. 'How about a kiss for your jailbird brother?’ he 
said. 


She turned halfway, as if to touch her lips to his cheek, but he slid a palm 
down her back and tipped her face up to his and kissed her full on the mouth — 
not a brotherly kiss, there was no mistaking it for that, but a long, slow, 
greedy kiss, messy and voluptuous. His bathrobe fell slightly open as his left 
hand sank from her chin to neck, collarbone, base of throat, his fingertips just 
inside the edge of her thin polka-dot shirt and trembling over the warm skin 
there. 


I was astounded. She didn't flinch, didn't move. When he came up for breath 
she pulled her chair in close to the table and reached for the sugar bowl as if 
nothing had happened. Spoon tinkled against china. The smell of Charles — 
damp, alcoholic, sweet with the linden-water he used for shaving — hung 
heavy in the air. She brought the cup up and took a sip and it was only then I 
remembered: Camilla didn't like sugar in her coffee. She drank it 
unsweetened, with milk. 


I was astounded. I felt I should say something — anything but I couldn't think 
of a thing to say. 


It was Charles who finally broke the silence. 'I'm starving to death,’ he said, 
retying the knot of his bathrobe and pottering over to the refrigerator. The 
white door opened with a bark. He stooped to look in, his face radiant in the 
glacial light. 


'I think I'm going to make some scrambled eggs,’ he said. 
"Anyone else want some?’ 


Late that afternoon, after I'd gone home and had a shower and a nap, I went 
to visit Francis. 


‘Come in, come in,’ he said, waving me in frenetically. His Greek books were 
spread out on the desk; a cigarette burned in a full ashtray. "What happened 
last night? Was Charles arrested"? Henry wouldn't tell me a thing. I got part of 
the story from Camilla but she didn't know the details... Sit down. Do you 
want a drink? What can I get for you?’ 


It was always fun to tell Francis a story. He leaned forward and hung on 
every word, reacting at appropriate intervals with astonishment, sympathy, 
dismay. When I was finished he bombarded me with questions. Normally, 
enjoying his rapt attention, I would have strung it out much longer, but after 
the first decent pause I said, 'Now I want to ask you something.’ 


He was lighting a fresh cigarette. He clicked shut the lighter and brought his 
eyebrows down. 'What is it?’ 


Though I had thought of various ways to phrase this question, it seemed, in 
the interests of clarity, most expedient to come to the point. "Do you think 
Charles and Camilla ever sleep together?’ 

I said. 

He had just drawn in a big lungful of smoke. At my question it spurted out 
his nose the wrong way. 

'Do you?’ 

But he was coughing. "What makes you ask something like that?’ he finally 
said. 

I told him what I'd seen that morning. He listened, his eyes red and streaming 
from the smoke. 

‘That's nothing,’ he said. 'He was probably still drunk.’ 

"You haven't answered my question. 

He laid the burning cigarette in the ashtray. 'All right,’ he said, blinking. 'If 
you want my opinion. Yes. I think sometimes they do.' 

There was a long silence. Francis closed his eyes, rubbed them with thumb 
and forefinger. 

'I don't think it's anything that happens too frequently,’ he said. 'But you 
never know. Bunny always claimed he walked in on them once.’ 

I stared at him. 

"He told Henry, not me. I'm afraid I don't know the details. 

Apparently he had the key and you remember how he used to barge in 
without knocking — Come now,’ he said. 'You must have had some idea.’ 


'No,' I said, though actually I had, from the time I'd first met them. I'd 
attributed this to my own mental perversity, some degenerate vagary of 
thought, a projection of my own desire because he was her brother, and they 
did look an awful lot alike, and the thought of them together brought, along 
with the predictable twinges of envy, scruple, surprise, another very much 
sharper one of excitement. 

Francis was looking at me keenly. Suddenly I felt he knew exactly what I 
was thinking. 

"They're very jealous of each other,’ he said. 'He much more so than she. I 
always thought it was a childish, charming thing, you know, all verbal rough- 
and-tumble, even Julian used to tease them about it — I mean, I'm an only 
child, so is Henry, what do we know about such things? We used to talk about 
what fun it would be to have a sister.’ He chuckled. 'More fun than either of us 
imagined, it seems,’ he said. 'Not that I think it's so terrible, either — from a 
moral standpoint, that is — but it's not at all the casual, good-natured sort of 
thing that one might hope. It runs a lot more deep and nasty. Last fall, around 
the time when that farmer fellow...» 

He trailed away, sat smoking for some moments, an expression of frustration 
and vague irritation on his face. 

"Well?' I said. "What happened?’ 

‘Specifically?’ He shrugged. 'I can't tell you. I remember hardly anything that 
happened that night, which isn't to say the tenor of it isn't clear enough. ..' He 
paused; started to speak but thought better of it; shook his head. 'I mean, after 
that night it was obvious to everyone,’ he said. 'Not that it wasn't before. It's 
just that Charles was so much worse than anyone had expected. 

Ti 

He sat staring into space for a moment. Then he shook his head and reached 
for another cigarette. 

‘It's impossible to explain,’ he said. 'But one can also look at it on an 
extremely simple level. They were always keen on each other, those two. And 
I'm no prude, but this jealousy I find astounding. One thing I'll say for 
Camilla, she's more reasonable about that sort of thing. Perhaps she has to be.' 

"What sort of thing?’ 

‘About Charles going to bed with people.’ 

"Who's he been to bed with?’ 

He brought up his glass and took a big drink. The for one,’ he said. 'That 
shouldn't surprise you. If you drank as much as he does, I daresay I would 
have been to bed with you, too.' 

Despite the archness of his tone — which normally would have irritated me — 
there was a melancholy undernote in his voice. He drained off the rest of the 
whiskey and set the glass down on the end table with a bang. He said, after a 
pause: 'It hasn't happened often. Three or four times. The first time when I 
was a sophomore and he was a freshman. We were up late, drinking in my 
room, one thing led to another. Loads of fun on a rainy night, but you should 


have seen us at breakfast the next morning.’ He laughed bleakly. 'Remember 
the night Bunny died?’ he said. 'When I was in your room? And Charles 
interrupted us at that rather unfortunate moment?’ 

I knew what he was going to tell me. "You left my room with him,' I said. 

"Yes. He was awfully drunk. Actually a little too drunk. Which was quite 
convenient for him as he pretended not to remember it the next day. Charles is 
very prone to these attacks of amnesia after he spends the night at my house.’ 
He looked at me out of the corner of his eye. 'He denies it all quite 
convincingly and the thing is, he expects me to play along with him, you 
know, pretend it never happened,' he said. 'I don't even think he does it out of 
guilt. As a matter of fact he does it in this particularly lighthearted way which 
infuriates me. 

I said: "You like him a lot, don't you?’ 

I don't know what made me say this. Francis didn't blink. 'I don't know,’ he 
said coldly, reaching for a cigarette with his long, nicotine-stained fingers. 'I 
like him well enough, I suppose. We're old friends. Certainly I don't fool 
myself that it's more than that. 

But I've had a lot of fun with him, which is a great deal more than you can 
say about Camilla.’ 

That was what Bunny would have called a shot across the bow. I was too 
surprised to even answer. 

Francis — though his satisfaction was evident — did not acknowledge his 
point. He leaned back in his chair by the window; the edges of his hair glowed 
metallic red in the sun. He said: ‘It's unfortunate, but there it is. Neither one 
cares about anybody but himself— or herself, as the case may be. They like to 
present a unified front but I don't even know how much they care about each 
other. Certainly they take a perverse pleasure in leading one on — yes, she 
does lead you on,' he said when I tried to interrupt, 'I've seen her do it. And 
the same with Henry. He used to be crazy about her, I'm sure you know that; 
for all I know he still is. As for Charles — well, basically, he likes girls. If he's 
drunk, I'll do. But —just when I've managed to harden my heart, he'll turn 
around and be so sweet. I always fall for it. I don't know why. 

He was quiet for a moment. 'We don't run much to looks in my family, you 
know, all knuckles and cheekbones and beaky noses,' he said. 'Maybe that's 
why I tend to equate physical beauty with qualities with which it has 
absolutely nothing to do. I see a pretty mouth or a moody pair of eyes and 
imagine all sorts of deep affinities, private kinships. Never mind that half a 
dozen jerks are clustered round the same person, just because they've been 
duped by the same pair of eyes.’ He leaned over and energetically stubbed out 
his cigarette. ‘She'd behave a lot more like Charles if she were allowed to; he's 
so possessive, though, he keeps her reeled in pretty tight. Can you imagine a 
worse situation? He watches her like a hawk. And he's also rather poor — not 
that it matters much,' he said hastily, realizing to whom he was speaking, ‘but 
he's quite self-conscious about it. Very proud of his family, you know, very 


well aware that he himself is a sot. 

There's something kind of Roman about it, all this regard he puts in his 
sister's honor. Bunny wouldn't go near Camilla, you know, he would hardly 
even look at her. He used to say that she wasn't his type but I think the old 
Dutchman in him just knew she was 5i6 bad medicine. My God... I remember 
once, a long time ago, we had dinner at a ridiculous Chinese restaurant in 
Bennington. 

The Lobster Pagoda. It's closed now. Red bead curtains and a shrine to the 
Buddha with an artificial waterfall. We drank a lot of drinks with umbrellas in 
them and Charles was horribly drunk — not that it was his fault, really; we 
were all drunk, the cocktails are always too strong in a place like that and 
besides, you never know quite what they put in them, do you? Outside, they 
had a footbridge to the parking lot that went over a moat with tame ducks and 
goldfish. Somehow Camilla and I got separated from everyone else, and we 
were waiting there. Comparing fortunes. 

Hers said something like «Expect a kiss from the man of your dreams,» 
which was too good to pass up, so I — well, we were both drunk, and we got a 
little carried away — and then Charles barreled out of nowhere and grabbed me 
by the back of the neck and I thought he was going to throw me over the rail. 
Bunny was there, too, he pulled him off, and Charles had the sense to say he'd 
been joking but he wasn't, he hurt me, twisted my arm behind my back and 
damn near pulled it out of the socket. I don't know where Henry was. 
Probably looking at the moon and reciting some poem from the T'ang 
Dynasty.’ 

Subsequent events had knocked it from my mind, but the mention of Henry 
made me think of what Charles had told me that morning about the FBI — and 
of another question, this one regarding Henry too. I was wondering if this was 
the time to bring up either of them when Francis said, abruptly and in a tone 
suggestive of bad news to follow, 'You know, I was at the doctor's today.’ 

I waited for him to go on. He didn't. 

"What for?' I finally said. 

‘Same stuff. Dizziness. Chest pains. I wake up in the night and can't get my 
breath. Last week I went back to the hospital and let them run some tests but 
nothing turned up. They referred me to this other fellow. A neurologist.’ 

‘And?! 

He shifted restlessly in his chair. 'He didn't find anything. 

None of these hick doctors are any good. Julian gave me the name of a man 
in New York; he was the one who cured the Shah of Isram, you know, of that 
blood disease. It was in all the papers. 

Julian says he's the best diagnostician in the country and one of the best in 
the world. He's booked two years in advance but Julian says maybe if he calls 
him, he might agree to see me.' 

He was reaching for another cigarette, and the last, untouched, was still 
smoldering in the ashtray. 


The way you smoke,’ I said, 'no wonder you're short of breath.’ 

That has nothing to do with it,’ he said irritably, tamping the cigarette on the 
back of his wrist. That's just what these stupid Vermonters tell you. Stop 
smoking, cut out booze and coffee. 

I've been smoking half my life. You think I don't know how it affects me? 
You don't get these nasty cramping pains in your chest from cigarettes, nor 
from having a few drinks, either. 

Besides, I have all these other symptoms. Heart palpitations. 

Ringing in the ears.’ 

‘Smoking can have totally weird effects on your body.’ 

Francis frequently made fun of me when I used some phrase he perceived as 
Californian. 'Totally weird?’ he said maliciously, mimicking my accent: 
suburban, hollow, flat. 'Rillyf I looked at him slouching in his chair: polka-dot 
tie, narrow Bally shoes, foxy narrow face. His grin was foxy too, and showed 
too many teeth. I was sick of him. I stood up. The room was so smoky that my 
eyes watered. 'Yeah,' 1 said. 'I've got to go now.’ 

Francis's snide expression faded. 'You're mad, aren't you?' he said anxiously. 

'No.' 

"Yes you are.’ 

"No, I'm not,’ I said. These sudden, panicky attempts at conciliation annoyed 
me more than his insults. 

Tm sorry. Don't listen to me. I'm drunk, I'm sick, I didn't mean it.’ 

Without warning I had a vision of Francis — twenty years later, fifty years, in 
a wheelchair. And of myself — older, too, sitting around with him in some 
smoky room, the two of us repeating this exchange for the thousandth time. 
At one time I had liked the idea, that the act, at least, had bound us together; 
we were not ordinary friends, but friends till-death-do-us-part. This thought 
had been my only comfort in the aftermath of Bunny's death. Now it made me 
sick, knowing there was no way out. I was stuck with them, with all of them, 
for good. 

On the walk home from Francis's — head down, sunk in a black, inarticulate 
tangle of anxiety and gloom — I heard Julian's voice saying my name. 

I turned. He was just coming out of the Lyceum. At the sight of his quizzical, 
kindly face — so sweet, so agreeable, so glad to see me — something wrenched 
deep in my chest. 

‘Richard,’ he said again, as if there were no one on earth he could possibly be 
so delighted to see. 'How are you?’ 

‘Fine.’ 

Tm just going over to North Hampden. Will you walk with me?' 

I looked at the innocent, happy face and thought: If he only knew. It would 
kill him. 

‘Julian, I'd love to, thanks,' I said. 'But I have to be getting home.’ 

He looked at me closely. The concern in his eyes made me nearly sick with 
self-loathing. 


I see so little of you these days, Richard,’ he said. 'I feel that you're 
becoming just a shadow in my life. 

The benevolence, the spiritual calm, that radiated from him seemed so clear 
and true that, for a dizzying moment, I felt the darkness lift almost palpably 
from my heart. The relief was such 519 that I almost broke down sobbing; but 
then, looking at him again, | felt the whole poisonous weight come crashing 
back down, full force. 

‘Are you sure you're all right?’ 

He can never know. We can never tell him. 

‘Oh. Sure I am,' I said. 'T'm fine.’ 

Though the fuss about Bunny had mostly blown over, the college had still 
not returned quite to normal — and not at all in the new 'Dragnet' spirit of drug 
enforcement which had spread across campus. Gone were the nights when, on 
one's way home from the Rathskeller, it was not unheard-of to see an 
occasional teacher standing under the bare light bulb of Durbinstall basement 
— Arnie Weinstein, say, the Marxist economist (Berkeley, '69), or the haggard, 
scraggle-haired Englishman who taught classes in Sterne and Defoe. 

Long gone. I had watched grim security men dismantling the underground 
laboratory, hauling out cartons of beakers and copper piping, while 
Durbinstall's head chemist — a small, pimple faced boy from Akron named Cal 
Clarken — stood by and wept, still in his trademark high-top sneakers and lab 
coat. The anthropology teacher who for twenty years had taught 'Voices and 
Visions: The Thought of Carlos Castaneda’ (a course which featured, at its 
conclusion, a mandatory campfire ritual at which pot was smoked) announced 
quite suddenly that he was leaving for Mexico on sabbatical. Arnie Weinstein 
took to frequenting the townie bars, where he attempted to discuss Marxist 
theory with hostile countermen. The scraggle-haired Englishman had returned 
to his primary interest, which was chasing girls twenty years younger than 
himself. 

As part of the new 'Drug Awareness’ policy, Hampden was hosting an 
intercollege tournament, in game-show format, which tested students’ 
knowledge about drugs and alcohol. The questions were developed by the 
National Council for Alcoholism and Substance Abuse. The shows were 
moderated by a local TV personality (Liz Ocavello) and were broadcast live 
on Channel 12. 

Unexpectedly, the quizzes proved wildly popular, though not in the spirit the 
sponsors might have hoped. Hampden had assembled a crack team which — 
like one of those commando forces in the movies, made up of desperate 
fugitives, men with freedom to gain and nothing to lose — proved virtually 
invincible. 

It was an all-star lineup: Cloke Rayburn; Bram Guernsey; Jack Teitelbaum; 
Laura Stora; none other than the legendary Cal Clarken heading the team. Cal 
was participating in hopes of being allowed back into school next term; Cloke 
and Bram and Laura as part of their required hours of community service; 


Jack was merely along for the ride. Their combined expertise was nothing 
short of stunning. Together, they led Hampden to victory after crashing 
victory over Williams, Vassar, Sarah Lawrence, fielding with dazzling speed 
and skill such questions as: Name five drugs in the Thorazine family, or: What 
are the effects of PCP? 

But — even though business had been seriously curtailed — I was not 
surprised to find that Cloke was still plying his trade, though a good bit more 
discreetly than he had used to in the old days. One Thursday night before a 
party I went down to Judy's room to ask for an aspirin and, after a brief but 
mysterious inquisition from behind the locked door, found Cloke inside, 
shades pulled, busy with her mirror and her druggist'’s scales. 

‘Hi,’ he said, ushering me quickly inside and locking the door behind me 
again. 'What can I do for you tonight?’ 

"Uh, nothing, thanks,’ I said. 'I'm just looking for Judy. Where is she?’ 

‘Oh,’ he said, crossing back to his work. 'She's in the costume shop. I thought 
she probably sent you over. I like Judy but she's got to make such a big 
production of everything, which is definitely not cool. Not cool’ — carefully, 
he tapped a measure of powder into an open fold of paper — ‘at all.' His hands 
trembled; it was evident that he had been dipping pretty freely into his own 
wares. ‘But I had to toss my own scales, you know, after all that shit happened 
and what the fuck am I supposed to do? Go up to the infirmary? She was 
running around all day, at lunch and stuff, rubbing her nose and saying, 
«Gramma's here, Gramma's here,» lucky nobody knew what the fuck she was 
talking about, but still.’ He nodded at the open book beside him — Janson's 
History of Art, which was cut practically to tatters. "Even these fucking 
bindles. She got fixated on the idea that I had to make these fancy ones, Jesus, 
open them up and there's a fucking Tintoretto on the inside. And gets pissed if 
I cut them out so that the cupid's butt or whatever isn't, like, right in the 
center. How's Camilla?’ he said, glancing up. 

‘Fine,’ I said .1 didn't want to think about Camilla. I didn't want to think of 
anything having to do with Greek or Greek J class, either one. * 

"How's she liking her new place?’ said Cloke. 

"What?' 

He laughed. 'Don't you know”' he said. 'She moved.' 

"What? Where to?’ 

‘Don't know. Down the street, probably. Stopped by to see the twins — hand 
me that blade, would you? — stopped by to see them yesterday and Henry was 
helping her put her stuff in boxes. 

He had abandoned his work at the scales and was now cutting out lines on 
the mirror. 'Charles is going to Boston for the summer and she's staying here. 
Said she didn't want to stay there alone and it was too much of a pain to 
sublet. Sounds like there are going to be a lot of us here this summer.’ He 
offered me the mirror and a rolled-up twenty. 'Bram and I are looking for a 
place right now.’ 


"This is very good,’ I said, half a minute or so later, just as the first euphoric 
sparkle was starting to hit my synapses. 

"Yeah. It's excellent, isn't it? Especially after that awful shit of Laura's that 
was going around. Those FBI guys analyzed it and said it was about eighty 
percent talcum powder or something.’ 

He wiped his nose. 'Did they ever come talk to you, by the way?’ 

The FBI? No.’ 

Tm surprised. After all that lifeboat shit they were feeding everybody.’ 

"What are you talking about?’ 

‘Christ. They were saying all kinds of weird stuff. There was a conspiracy 
going on. They knew that Henry and Charles and I were involved. We were 
all in bad trouble and there was only room for one guy on the lifeboat out. 
And that guy was going to be the guy that talked first.’ He sniffed again, and 
rubbed his nose with his knuckle. ‘In a way, it got worse after my dad sent the 
lawyer up. «Why do you need a lawyer if you're innocent,» all that kind of 
shit. Thing is, even the fucking lawyer couldn't figure out what they were 
trying to get me to confess to. They kept saying that my friends — Henry and 
Charles — had ratted on me. 

That they were the guilty ones, and if I didn't start talking I might get blamed 
for something I didn't even do.’ 

My heart was pounding, and not just from the cocaine. Talking?’ 

I said. ‘About what?’ 

‘Search me. My lawyer said not to worry, that they were full of shit. I talked 
to Charles and he said they were giving him the same line, too. And 1 mean — 
I know you like Henry but I think he got pretty flipped out by the whole 
thing.’ 

"What?' 

"Well, I mean, he's so straight, probably never even had an overdue library 
book, and out of the blue here comes the fucking FB7 all over him. I don't 
know what the hell he told them, but he was trying to point them in any 
direction but towards himself 'Like what direction?’ 

"Like me.’ He reached for a cigarette. 'And, I hate to say it, but I think 
towards you.' 

The?’ 

'I never brought your name up, man. I hardly fucking know you. But they got 
it from somewhere. And it wasn't from me.’ 

"You mean they actually mentioned my name»!' I said, after a stunned 
silence. 

"Maybe Marion gave it to them or something, I don't know. 

God knows, they had Bram's name, Laura's, even Jud Mac Kenna's ... Yours 
was only once or twice, towards the end there. 

Don't ask me why, but I had the idea the Feebies went over to talk to you. I 
guess that would've been the night before they found Bunny's body. They 
were coming over to talk to Charles again, I know that, but Henry called and 


tipped him off that they were on the way. That was when I was staying over at 
the twins’. 

Well, I didn't want to see them, either, so I headed over to Bram's, and 
Charles I guess just went to some townie bar and got completely rucked up.' 

My heart was thumping so wildly I thought it would burst in my chest like a 
red balloon. Had Henry got scared, tried to sic 1 the FBI on me? That didn't 
make sense. There was no way, at least that I could see, he could set me up 
without incriminating himself. Then again (paranoia, I thought, ,' have to stop 
this), maybe it was no coincidence that Charles had stopped by my room that 
night on his way to the bar. Maybe he had been apprised of the whole thing 
and — unbeknownst to Henry — had come over and successfully lured me out 
of harm's way. 

"You look like you could use a drink, man,' said Cloke presently. 

"Yeah,' 1 said. I had been sitting for a long time without saying anything. 
"Yeah, I guess I could.' 

"Why don't you go to the Villager tonight? Thirsty Thursday. 

Two for the price of one.’ 

‘Are you going?’ 

‘Everybody's going. Shit. You're trying to tell me you never went to Thirsty 
Thursday before?’ 

So I went to Thirsty Thursday, with Cloke and Judy, with Bram and Sophie 
Dearbold and some friends of Sophie's, and a lot of other people i didn't even 
know, and though I don't know what time I got home I didn't wake up till six 
the next evening, when Sophie knocked at my door. My stomach hurt and my 
head was splitting in two, but I put on my robe and let her in. She had just got 
out of ceramics class and was wearing a T-shirt and faded old jeans. She had 
brought me a bagel from the snack bar. 

‘Are you okay?’ she said. 

"Yes,' I said, though I had to hold on to the back of my chair to stand up. 

"You were really drunk last night.’ 

T know,’ I said. Getting out of bed had made me feel, suddenly, much worse. 
Red spots jumped in front of my eyes. 

'I was worried. I thought I'd better come check on you.’ She laughed. 
"Nobody's seen you all day. Somebody told me they saw the flag at the guard 
booth at half-mast and I was afraid you might be dead.’ 

I sat on the bed, breathing hard, and stared at her. Her face was like a half- 
remembered fragment of dream — bar? I thought. 

There had been the bar — Irish whiskeys and a pinball game with Bram, 
Sophie's face blue in the sleazy neon light. More cocaine, cut into lines with a 
school ID, off the side of a compact-disc case. Then a ride in the back of 
someone's truck, a Gulf sign on the highway, someone's apartment? The rest 
of the evening was black. Vaguely I remembered a long, earnest conversation 
with Sophie, standing by an ice-filled sink in someone's kitchen (Meister Brau 
and Genesee, MOMA calendar on the wall). Certainly — a coil of fear 


wrenched in my stomach — certainly I hadn't said anything about Bunny. 
Certainly not. Rather frantically, I searched my memory. Certainly, if I had, 
she would not be in my room now, looking at me the way she was, would not 
have brought me this toasted bagel on a paper plate, the smell of which (it was 
an onion bagel) made me want to retch. 

"How did I get home?’ I said, looking up at her. 

‘Don't you remember?’ 

'No.' Blood hammered nightmarishly in my temples. 

Then you were drunk. We called a cab from Jack Teitelbaum's.' 

"And where did we go?’ 

‘Here.’ 

Had we slept together? Her expression was neutral, offering no clue. If we 
had, I wasn't sorry — I liked Sophie, I knew she liked me, she was one of the 
prettiest girls at Hampden besides — but this was the kind of thing you like to 
know for sure. I was trying to think how I could ask her, tactfully, when 
someone knocked at the door. The raps were like gun shots. Sharp pains 
ricocheted through my head. 

‘Come in,’ said Sophie. 

Francis stuck his head around the door. 'Well, look at this, would you,' he 
said. He liked Sophie. 'It's the car trip reunion j| and nobody asked me. 

Sophie stood up. ‘Francis! Hello! How've you been?’ 

‘Good, thanks. I haven't talked to you since the funeral.’ 

'I know. I was thinking about you just the other day. How have you been?’ 

I lay back on the bed, my stomach boiling. The two of them were conversing 
animatedly. I wished they would both leave. 

"Well well,’ said Francis after a long interlude, peering over Sophie's 
shoulder at me. 'What's wrong with tiny patient?’ 

"Too much to drink." 

He came over to the bed. He seemed, up close, slightly agitated. 'Well, I 
hope you've learned your lesson,’ he said brightly and then, in Greek, added: 
‘Important news, my friend.’ 

My heart sank. I had screwed up. I had been careless, talked too much, said 
something weird. 'What have I done?’ I said, I had said it in English. If Francis 
was flustered, he didn't look it. 'I haven't the slightest idea,’ he said. 'Do you 
want some tea or something?’ 

I tried to figure out what he was trying to say. The pounding agony in my 
head was such that I couldn't concentrate oil anything. Nausea swelled in a 
great green wave, trembled at the crest, sank and rolled again. I felt saturated 
with despair. 

Everything, I thought tremulously, everything would be okay if only I could 
have a few moments of quiet and if I lay very, very still. 

‘No,’ I said finally. ‘Please.’ 

‘Please what?’ 

The wave swelled again. I rolled over on my stomach and gave a long, 


miserable moan. 

Sophie caught on first. 'Come on,' she said to Francis, ‘let's go. I think we 
ought to let him go back to sleep. 

I fell into a tormented half-dreaming state from which I woke, several hours 
later, to a soft knock. The room was now dark. 

The door creaked open and a flag of light fell in from the corridor. 

Francis slipped in and closed the door behind him. 

He switched on the weak reading lamp on my desk and pulled the chair over 
to my bed. 'I'm sorry but I've got to talk to you,’ he said. ‘Something very odd 
has happened. 

I had forgotten my earlier fright; it came back in a sick, bilious wash. "What 
is it?’ 

‘Camilla has moved. She's moved out of the apartment. All her things are 
gone. Charles is there right now, drunk nearly out of his mind. He says she's 
living at the Albemarle Inn. Can you imagine? The Albemarle?’ 

I rubbed my eyes, trying to collect my thoughts. ‘But I knew that,’ I said 
finally. 

"You did?’ He was astonished. 'Who told you?' 

'I think it was Cloke.’ 

‘Cloke? When was this?’ 

I explained, as far as memory allowed. 'I forgot about it,' I said. 

‘Forgot? How could you forget something like that?’ 

I sat up a bit. Fresh pain surged through my head. "What ^ difference does it 
make?' I said, a little angrily. 'If she wants to w| leave I don't blame her. 
Charles will just have to straighten up. 

That's all.’ 

‘But the Albemarle?’ said Francis. 'Do you have any idea how expensive it 
is?’ 

‘Of course I do,' I said irritably. The Albemarle was the nicest inn in town. 
Presidents had stayed there, and movie stars. 'So what?’ 

Francis put his head in his hands. 'Richard,' he said, ‘you're dense. You must 
have brain damage.’ 

'I don't know what you're talking about.’ 

"How about two hundred dollars a night? Do you think the twins have that 
kind of money? Who the hell do you think is paying for it?’ 

I stared at him. 

‘Henry, that's who,’ said Francis. 'He came over when Charles was out and 
moved her there, lock, stock and barrel. Charles came home and her things 
were gone. Can you imagine? He can't even get in touch with her, she's 
registered under a different name. Henry won't tell him anything. For that 
matter, he won't tell me anything, either. Charles is absolutely beside himself. 
He asked me to call Henry and see if I could get anything out of him, I 
couldn't, of course, he was like a brick wall.’ 

"What's the big deal? Why are they making such a secret of it?’ 


'I don't know. I don't know Camilla's side but I think Henry is being very 
foolish.’ 

"Maybe she has reasons of her own.’ 

‘She doesn't think that way,' said Francis, exasperated. 'I know Henry. This is 
just the sort of thing he'd do and it's just the way he'd do it. But even if there's 
a good reason it's the wrong way to go about it. Especially now. Charles is in 
a state. Henry should know better than to antagonize him after the other night.’ 

Uncomfortably, I thought of the walk home from the police station. 'You 
know, there's something I've meant to tell you,' I said, and I told him about 
Charles's outburst. 

‘Oh, he's mad at Henry all right,’ said Francis tersely. 'He's told me the same 
thing — that Henry pushed it all off on him, basically. But what does he 
expect? When you get down to it, I don't think Henry asked all that much of 
him. That's not the reason he's angry. The real reason is Camilla. Do you want 
to know my theory?’ 

"What?' 

'I think Camilla and Henry have been slipping around with each other for 
quite some time. I think Charles has been suspicious for a while but until 
lately he didn't have any proof. Then he found something out. I don't know 
what, exactly,’ he said, raising his hand as I tried to interrupt, 'but it's not hard 
to imagine. 

I think it's something he found out down at the Corcorans'’. 

Something he saw or heard. And I think it must've happened before we 
arrived. The night before they left for Connecticut with Cloke, everything 
seemed fine, but you remember what Charles was like when we got there. 
And by the time we left they weren't even speaking.’ 

I told Francis what Cloke had said to me in the upstairs hallway. 

‘God knows what happened, then, if Cloke was smart enough to catch on,' 
said Francis. 'Henry was sick, probably wasn't thinking too clearly. And the 
week we came back, you know, when he holed up in his apartment, I think 
Camilla was there a lot. She was there, I know, the day I went to take him that 
Mycenaean book and I think she might have even spent the night a couple of 
times. But then he got well and Camilla came home and for a while after that, 
things were okay. Remember? Around the time you took me to the hospital?’ 

'I don't know about that,’ I said. I told him about the glass I had seen lying 
broken in the fireplace at the twins' apartment. 

"Well, who knows what was really happening. At least they seemed better. 
And Henry was in good spirits too. Then there was that quarrel, the night 
Charles ended up in jail. Nobody seems to want to say exactly what that was 
all about but I'll bet it had something to do with her. And now this. Good God. 

Charles is in a bloody rage.’ 

‘Do you think he's sleeping with her? Henry?’ 

Tf he's not, he's certainly done everything he possibly can to convince 
Charles that he is.' He stood up. 'I tried to call him again before I came over 


here,’ he said. 'He wasn't in. I expect he's over at the Albemarle. I'm going to 
drive by and see if his car is there.’ 

"There must be some way you can find out what room she's in.’ 

Tve thought about that. I can't get anything out of the desk clerk. Maybe I'd 
have better luck talking to one of the maids, but I'm afraid I'm not very good 
at that sort of thing.' He sighed. 'I wish I could see her for just five minutes.' 

‘Tf you find her, do you think you can talk her into coming home? 

'I don't know. I must say, I wouldn't care to be living with Charles right now. 
But I still think everything would be okay if Henry would just keep out of it.' 

After Francis left I fell asleep again. When I woke up it was four in the 
morning. I had slept for nearly twenty-four hours. 

The nights that spring were unusually cold; this one was colder than most 
and the heat was on in the dormitories — steam heat, full blast, which made it 
unbearably stuffy even with the windows open. My sheets were damp with 
sweat. I got up and stuck my head out the window and took a few breaths. The 
chill air was so refreshing that I decided to put on some clothes and go for a 
walk. 

The moon was full and very bright. Everything was silent except for the 
chirp of the crickets and the full foamy toss of the wind in the trees. Down at 
the Early Childhood Center, where Marion worked, the swings creaked gently 
to and fro, and the corkscrewed slide gleamed silver in the moonlight. 

The most striking object in the playground was without question the giant 
snail. Some art students had built it, modeling it after the giant snail in the 
movie of Doctor Dolittle. It was pink, made of fiberglass, nearly eight feet 
tall, with a hollow shell so kids could play inside. Silent in the moonlight, it 
was like some patient prehistoric creature that had crawled down from the 
mountains: dumb, lonely, biding its time, untroubled by the articles of 
playground equipment which surrounded it. 

Access to the snail's interior was gained by a child-sized tunnel, maybe two 
feet high, at the base of the tail. From this runnel, I was extremely startled to 
see protruding a pair of adult male feet, shod in some oddly familiar brown- 
and-white spectator shoes. 

On hands and knees, I leaned forward and stuck my head in the tunnel and 
was overwhelmed by the raw, powerful stink of whiskey. Light snores echoed 
in the close, boozy darkness. The shell, apparently, had acted as a brandy 
snifter, gathering and concentrating the vapors until they were so pungent I 
felt nauseated just to breathe them. 

I caught and shook a bony kneecap. 'Charles.. My voice boomed and 
reverberated in the dark interior. 'Charles.' 

He began to flounder wildly, as if he had waked to find himself in ten feet of 
water. At length, and after repeated assurances that I was who I said I was, he 
fell on his back again, breathing hard. 

‘Richard,’ he said thickly. 'Thank God. I thought you were some kind of 
creature from space.’ 


At first it had been completely dark inside but now my eyes had adjusted I 
was aware of a faint, pinkish light, moonlight, just enough to see by, glowing 
through the translucent walls. "What are you doing here?’ I asked him. 

He sneezed. 'I was depressed,’ he said. 'I thought if I slept here it might make 
me feel better.’ 

‘Did it?’ 

"No.' He sneezed again, five or six times in a row. Then he slumped back on 
the floor. 

I thought of the nursery-school kids, huddled round Charles the next 
morning like Lilliputians round the sleeping Gulliver. 

The lady who ran the Childhood Center — a psychiatrist, whose office was 
down the hall from Dr Roland's — seemed to me a pleasant, grandmotherly 
sort, though who could predict how she'd react to finding a drunk passed out 
on her playground. 

"Wake up, Charles,’ I said. 

"Leave me alone.’ 

"You can't sleep here. 

'I can do whatever I want,' he said haughtily. 

"Why don't you come home with me? Have a drink.’ 

Tm fine.’ 

‘Oh, come on.’ 

"Well -just one.’ 

He bumped his head, hard, while crawling out. The little kids were certainly 
going to love that smell of Johnnie Walker when they came to school in a few 
hours. 

He had to lean on me on the way up the hill to Monmouth House. 

‘Just one,' he reminded me. 

I was not in terrific shape myself and had a hard time hauling him up the 
stairs. Finally I reached my room and deposited him on my bed. He offered 
little resistance and lay there, mumbling, while I went down to the kitchen. 

My offer of a drink had been a ruse. Quickly I searched the refrigerator but 
all I could find was a screw-top bottle of some syrupy Kosher stuff, 
strawberry-flavored, which had been there since Hanukkah. I'd tasted it once, 
with the idea of stealing it, and hurriedly spit it out and put the bottle back on 
the shelf. 

That had been months ago. I slipped it under my shirt; but when I got 
upstairs, Charles's head had rolled back against the wall where the headboard 
should have been and he was snoring. 

Quietly, I put the bottle on my desk, got a book, and left. 

Then I went to Dr Roland's office, where I lay reading on the couch with my 
jacket thrown over me until the sun came up, and I turned off the lamp and 
went to sleep. 

I woke around ten. It was Saturday, which surprised me a little; I'd lost track 
of the days. I went to the dining hall and had a late breakfast of tea and soft- 


boiled eggs, the first thing I'd eaten since Thursday. When I went to my room 
to change, around noon, Charles was still asleep in my bed. I shaved, put on a 
clean shirt, got my Greek books and went back to Dr Roland's. 

1 was ridiculously behind in my studies but not (as is often the case) so far 
behind as I'd thought. The hours went by without my noticing them. When I 
got hungry, around six, I went to the refrigerator in the Social Sciences office 
and found some leftover hors d'oeuvres and a piece of birthday cake, which I 
ate from my fingers off a paper plate at Dr Roland's desk. 

Since I wanted a bath, I came home around eleven, but when I unlocked the 
door and turned on the light, I was startled to find Charles still in my bed. He 
was sleeping, but the bottle of Kosher wine on the desk was half-empty. His 
face was flushed and pink. 

When I shook him, he felt as though he had a good deal of fever. 

‘Bunny,’ he said, waking with a start. 'Where did he go?’ 

"You're dreaming.’ 

"But he was here,’ he said, looking wildly round. 'For a long time. I saw him.' 

"You're dreaming, Charles.’ 

"But I saw him. He was here. He was sitting on the foot of the bed.' 

I went next door to borrow a thermometer. His temperature was nearly a 
hundred and three. I gave him two Tylenol and a glass of water and left him, 
rubbing his eyes and talking nonsense, to go downstairs and call Francis. 

Francis wasn't home. I decided to try Henry. To my surprise it was Francis, 
not Henry, who answered the phone. 

‘Francis? What are you doing over there?’ I said. 

‘Oh, hello, Richard,’ said Francis. He said it in a stagy way, as if for Henry's 
benefit. 

'I guess you can't really talk now.’ 

'No.' 

"Look here. I need to ask you something.’ I explained to him about Charles, 
playground and all. 'He seems pretty sick. What do you think I should do?’ 

'The snail?’ said Francis. 'You found him inside that giant snail?’ 

"Yes. What should I do? I'm kind of worried.’ 

Francis put his hand over the receiver .1 could hear a muffled discussion. In a 
moment Henry came on the line. ‘Hello, Richard,' he said. "What's the matter?’ 

I had to explain all over again. 

"How high, did you say? A hundred and three?’ 

"Yes. 

‘That's rather a lot, isn't it?’ 

I said that I thought it was. 

‘Did you give him some aspirins?' 

'A few minutes ago. 

"Well, then, why don't you wait and see. I'm sure he's fine.' 

This was exactly what I wanted to hear. 

"You're right,’ I said. 


'He probably caught cold sleeping out of doors. I'm sure he'll be better in the 
morning.’ 

I spent the night on Dr Roland's couch, and after breakfast, came back to my 
room with blueberry muffins and a half-gallon carton of orange juice which, 
with extraordinary difficulty, I had managed to steal from the buffet in the 
dining hall. 

Charles was awake, but feverish and vague. From the state of the bedclothes, 
which were tumbled and tossed, blanket trailing on the floor and the stained 
ticking of the mattress showing where he'd pulled the sheets loose, I gathered 
he'd not had a very good night of it. He said he wasn't hungry, but he managed 
a few limp little sips of the orange juice. The rest of the Kosher wine had 
disappeared, I noticed, in the night. 

"How do you feel?’ I asked him. 

He lolled his head on the crumpled pillow. 'Head hurts,’ he said sleepily. 'I 
had a dream about Dante.' 

‘Alighieri?’ 

"Yes. 

"What?' 

"We were at the Corcorans' house,’ he mumbled. 'Dante was there. He had a 
fat friend in a plaid shirt who yelled at us. 

I took his temperature; it was an even hundred. A bit lower, but still kind of 
high for the first thing in the morning. I gave him some more aspirin and 
wrote down my number at Dr Roland's in case he wanted to call me, but when 
he realized I was leaving, he rolled his head back and gave me such a dazed 
and hopeless look that it stopped me cold in the middle of my explanation 
about how the switchboard re-routed calls to administrative offices on the 
weekends. 

‘Or, I could stay here,’ I said. 'If I wouldn't be bothering you, that is. 

He pushed up on his elbows. His eyes were bloodshot and very bright. 'Don't 
go,' he said. 'I'm scared. Stay a little while.’ 

He asked me to read to him, but I didn't have anything around but Greek 
books, and he didn't want me to go to the library. So we played euchre on a 
dictionary balanced on his lap, and when that started to prove a bit much we 
switched to Casino. He won the first couple of games. Then he started losing. 
On the final hand — it was his deal — he shuffled the cards so poorly they were 
coming up in virtually exact sequence, which should not have made for very 
challenging play but he was so absentminded he kept trailing when he could 
easily have built or taken in. When I was reaching to increase a build, my 
hand brushed against his and I was taken aback by how dry and hot it was. 
And though the room was warm, he was shivering. I took his temperature. It 
had shot back to a hundred and three. 

I went downstairs to call Francis, but neither he nor Henry was in. So I went 
back upstairs. There was no doubt about it: Charles looked terrible. I stood in 
the door looking at him for a moment, and then I said, 'Wait a minute’ and 


went down the hall to Judy's room. 

I found her lying on her bed, watching a Mel Gibson movie on a VCR she'd 
borrowed from the video department. She was managing somehow to polish 
her fingernails, smoke a cigarette, and drink a Diet Coke all at the same time. 

‘Look at Mel,' she said. ‘Don't you just love him? If he called up and asked 
me to marry him I would do it in, like, one second.’ 

‘Judy, what would you do if you had a hundred and three degrees of fever?’ 

'I would go to the fucking doctor,’ she said without looking away from the 
TV. 

I explained about Charles. 'He's really sick,’ I said. 'What do you think I 
should do?! 

She fanned a red taloned hand in the air, drying it, her eyes still fixed on the 
screen. "Take him to the emergency room.’ 

"You think?! 

"You're not going to find any doctors on Sunday afternoon. 

Want to use my car?’ 

"That would be great.’ 

‘Keys are on the desk,' she said absently. ‘Bye. 

I drove Charles to the hospital in the red Corvette. He was bright-eyed and 
quiet, staring straight ahead, his right cheek pressed to the cool window-glass. 
In the waiting room, while I looked through magazines I'd seen before, he sat 
without moving, staring at a faded color photograph from the 19605 which 
hung opposite, of a nurse who had a white-nailed finger pressed to a white- 
lipsticked, vaguely pornographic mouth, in a sexy injunction to hospital 
silence. 

The doctor on duty was a woman. She'd been with Charles for only about 
five or ten minutes when she came from the back with his chart; leaning over 
the counter, she consulted briefly with the receptionist, who indicated me. 

The doctor came over and sat beside me. She was like one of those cheery 
young physicians in Hawaiian shirts and tennis shoes that you see on TV 
shows. 'Hello,' she said. T've just been looking at your friend. I think we're 
going to have to keep him with us for a couple of days.’ 

I put down my magazine. This I hadn't expected. "What's wrong?’ I said. 

‘It looks like bronchitis, but he's very dehydrated. I want to put him on an IV. 
Also we need to get that fever down. He'll be okay, but he needs rest and a 
good strong series of antibiotics, and to get those working as soon as we can 
we should give him those intravenously, too, for the first forty-eight hours at 
least. 

You both in school up at the college?’ 

"Yes. 

‘Is he under a lot of stress? Working on his thesis or something?’ 

"He works pretty hard,' I said cautiously. 'Why?' 

‘Oh, nothing. It just looks like he hasn't been eating properly. 

Bruises on his arms and legs, which look like a C deficiency, and he may be 


running low on some of the B vitamins as well. Tell me. Does he smoke?’ 

I couldn't help but laugh. At any rate, she wouldn't let me see him; she said 
she wanted to get some blood work done before the lab technicians left for the 
day, so I drove to the twins' apartment to gather some of his things. The place 
was ominously neat. I packed pajamas, toothbrush, shaving kit, and a couple 
of paperback books (P. G. Wodehouse, who I thought might cheer him up) 
and left the suitcase with the receptionist. 

Early the next morning, before I left for Greek, Judy knocked at my door and 
told me I had a call downstairs. I thought it was Francis or Henry — both of 
whom I'd tried to reach repeatedly the night before — or maybe even Camilla, 
but it was Charles. 

‘Hello,’ I said. 'How are you feeling?’ 

‘Oh, very well.’ His voice had a strange, forced note of cheeriness. 

‘It's quite comfortable here. Thanks for bringing the suitcase by.’ 

'No problem. Do you have one of those beds you can crank up and down?’ 

‘As a matter of fact I do. Listen. I want to ask you something. 

Will you do me a favor?’ 

‘Sure.’ 

Td like you to get a couple of things for me.’ He mentioned a book, and 
letter paper, and a bathrobe which I would find hanging on the inside of his 
closet door — 'Also,' he said hurriedly, 'there's a bottle of Scotch. You'll find it 
in the drawer of my night table. Do you think you can get it out this morning?’ 

'I have to go to Greek.’ 

"Well, after Greek, then. What time do you think you'll be here?’ 

I told him I would have to see about borrowing a car. 

‘Don't worry about that. Take a taxi. I'll give you the money. 

I really appreciate this, you know. What time should I expect you? Ten- 
thirty? Eleven?’ 

‘Probably more like eleven-thirty.' 

‘That's fine. Listen. I can't talk, I'm in the patients' lounge. I have to get back 
to bed before they miss me. You will come, won't you?’ 

Till be there. 

‘Bathrobe and letter paper.’ 

"Yes. 

"And the Scotch.’ 

‘Of course. 

Camilla was not at class that morning, but Francis and Henry were. Julian 
was there when I arrived, and I explained that Charles was in the hospital. 

Though Julian could be marvelously kind in difficult circumstances of all 
sorts, I sometimes got the feeling that he was less pleased by kindness itself 
than by the elegance of the gesture. But at this news he appeared genuinely 
concerned. 'Poor Charles,’ he said. 'It's not serious, is it?’ 

«I don't think so." 

‘Is he allowed any visitors? I shall telephone him this afternoon. 


Can you think of anything he might like? Food is so dreadful in the hospital. 
I remember years ago, in New York, when a dear friend of mine was in 
Columbia Presbyterian — in the bloody Harkness Pavilion, for goodness’ sake 
— the chef at the old Le Chasseur used to send her dinner to her every single 
day...» 

Henry, across the table, was absolutely inscrutable. I tried to catch Francis's 
glance; he slid me a quick look, bit his lip and glanced away. 

",.. and flowers,’ said Julian, ‘you've never seen so many flowers, she had so 
many I could only suspect that she was sending at least some of them to 
herself.’ He laughed. 'Anyway. 

I suppose there's no need to ask where Camilla is this morning. 

I saw Francis's eyes snap open. For a moment I was startled too, before I 
realized that he'd assumed — naturally, of course that she was at the hospital 
with Charles. 

Julian's eyebrows went down. 'What's wrong?’ he said. 

The utter blankness which met this question made him smile. 

‘It doesn't do to be too Spartan about these things,’ he said kindly, after a very 
long pause; and I was grateful to see that, as usual, he was projecting his own 
tasteful interpretation upon the confusion. 'Edmund was your friend. I too am 
very sorry that he is dead. But I think you are grieving yourselves sick over 
this, and not only does that not help him, it hurts you. And besides, is death 
really so terrible a thing? It seems terrible to you, because you are young, but 
who is to say he is not better off now than you are? Or — if death is a journey 
to another place — that you will not see him again?’ 

He opened his lexicon and began to search for his place. 'It does not do to be 
frightened of things about which you know nothing,’ he said. 'You are like 
children. Afraid of the dark.’ 

Francis didn't have his car with him, so after class I got Henry to drive me to 
Charles's apartment. Francis — who came too — was nervous and on edge, 
chain-smoking and pacing in the foyer while Henry stood in the bedroom door 
and watched me get Charles's things: quiet, expressionless, his eyes following 
me with an abstract calculation that entirely precluded the possibility of my 
asking him about Camilla — which I had determined to do as soon as we were 
alone — or, in fact, of asking practically anything at all. 

I got the book, the letter paper, the bathrobe. The Scotch I hesitated over. 

"What's the matter?’ said Henry. 

I put the bottle back in the drawer and shut it. 'Nothing,' I said. Charles, I 
knew, would be furious. I would have to think of a good excuse. 

He nodded at the closed drawer. 'Did he ask you to bring that to him?' he 
said. 

I did not feel like discussing Charles's personal business with Henry. I said: 
‘He asked for cigarettes, too, but I don't think he ought to have them.’ 

Francis had been pacing in the hall outside, prowling restlessly back and 
forth like a cat. During this exchange he paused in the door. Now I saw him 


dart a quick worried glance at Henry. 

"Well, you know...?' he said hesitantly. 

Henry said to me: 'If he wants it — the bottle, that is — 1 think you'd better go 
ahead and take it to him.' 

His tone annoyed me. 'He's sick,' I said. 'You haven't even seen him. If you 
think you're doing him a favor by —' 

‘Richard, he's right,’ said Francis nervously, tapping a cigarette ash into his 
cupped palm. 'I know about this a little bit. Sometimes, if you drink, it's 
dangerous to stop too suddenly. Makes you sick. People can die of it.’ 

I was shocked by this. Charles's drinking had never seemed so bad as all that. 
I did not comment on this, though, only said: "Well, if he's that bad off, he'll 
do a lot better in the hospital, won't he?’ 

"What do you mean?’ said Francis. 'Do you want them to put him in a detox? 
Do you know what that's like? When my mother came off drink that first time, 
she was out of her head. Seeing things. Wrestling with the nurse and yelling 
nutty stuff at the top of her lungs." 

‘Hate to think of Charles having DTs in the Catamount Memorial Hospital,’ 
said Henry. He went to the night table and got the bottle. It was a fifth, a little 
less than half full. "This will be cumbersome for him to hide,’ he said, holding 
it up by the neck. 

"We could pour it into something else,’ said Francis. 

It would be easier, I think, if we bought him a new one. Less chance of it 
leaking all over everything. And if we get him one of those flat ones he can 
keep it under his pillow without much trouble.’ 

It was a drizzly morning, overcast and gray. Henry didn't go with us to the 
hospital. He had us drop him off at his apartment — he had some excuse, 
plausible enough, I can't remember what it was and when he got out of the car 
he gave me a hundred-dollar bill. 

'Here,' he said. 'Give Charles my love. Will you buy some flowers for him or 
something?’ 

I looked at the bill, momentarily stunned. Francis snatched it from me and 
pushed it back at him. 'Come on, Henry,’ he said, with an anger that surprised 
me. 'Stop it.' 

'I want you to have it.’ 

‘Right. We're supposed to get him a hundred dollars’ worth of flowers.’ 

‘Don't forget to stop at the package store,’ said Henry coldly. 

‘Do what you like with the rest of the money. Just give him the change, if 
you want. I don't care.' 

He pushed the money at me again and shut the car door, with a click that was 
more contemptuous than if he'd slammed it. I watched his stiff square back 
receding up the walk. 

We bought Charles's whiskey — Cutty Sark, in a flat bottle — and a basket of 
fruit, and a box of petit-fours, and a game of Chinese checkers, and, instead of 
cleaning out the day's stock of carnations at the florist's downtown, an 


Oncidium orchid, yellow with russet tiger-stripes, in a red clay pot. 

On the way to the hospital, I asked Francis what had happened over the 
weekend. 

'Too upsetting. I don't want to talk about it now,’ he said. 'I did see her. Over 
at Henry's.’ 

"How is she?’ 

‘Fine. A little preoccupied but fine, basically. She said she didn't want 
Charles to know where she was and that was all there was to it. I wish I 
could've talked to her alone, and of course Henry didn't leave the room for a 
second.’ Restlessly, he felt in his pocket for a cigarette. "This may sound 
crazy,’ he said, 'but before I saw her I'd been a little worried, you know? That 
something maybe had happened to her.' 

I didn't say anything. The same thought had crossed my mind, more than 
once. 

'I mean — not that I thought Henry would kill her or anything, but you know 
— it was strange. Her disappearing like that, without r a word to anybody. I —' 
He shook his head. 'I hate to say this, but sometimes I wonder about Henry,’ 
he said. 'Especially with things like — well, you know what I mean?’ 

I didn't answer. Actually 1 did know what he meant, quite well. But it was 
too horrible for either of us to come out and say. 

Charles had a semi-private room. He was in the bed nearer the door, 
separated by a curtain from his roommate: the Hampden County postmaster, 
as we later discovered, who was in for a prostate operation. On his side there 
were a lot of FTD flower arrangements, and corny get-well cards taped to the 
wall, and he was propped up in bed talking with some noisy family members: 
food smells, laughter, everything cheery and snug. More of his visitors trailed 
in after Francis and me, stopping, for an instant, to peer curiously over the 
curtain at Charles: silent, alone, flat on his back with an IV in his arm. His 
face was puffy and his skin rough and coarse-looking, broken out in some 
kind of a rash. His hair was so dirty it looked brown. He was watching 
cartoons on television, violent ones, little animals that looked like weasels 
cracking up cars and bashing each other on the head. 

He struggled to sit up when we stepped into his partition. 

Francis drew the curtain behind us, practically in the faces of the 
postmaster's inquisitive visitors, a pair of middle-aged ladies, who were dying 
to get a good look at Charles and one of whom had craned around and cawed 
‘Good morning!’ through the gap in the curtain, in the hopes of initiating 
conversation. 

‘Dorothy! Louise!’ someone called from the other side. 'Over here!’ 

There were rapid footsteps on the linoleum and henlike clucks and cries of 
greeting. 

‘Damn them,’ said Charles. He was very hoarse and his voice was little more 
than a whisper. 'He's got people there all the time. They're always coming in 
and out and trying to look at me.' 


By way of distraction, I presented Charles with the orchid. .-, 'Really? You 
bought that for me, Richard?’ He seemed touched. —' 

I was going to explain that it was from all of us — without coming out and 
mentioning Henry, exactly — but Francis shot me a warning look and I kept 
my mouth shut. 

We unloaded the sack of presents. I'd half expected him to pounce on the 
Cutty Sark and tear it open in front of us, but he only thanked us and put the 
bottle in the compartment underneath his upright gray-plastic bed tray. 

"Have you talked to my sister?’ he said to Francis. He said it in a very cold 
way, as if he were saying Have you talked to my lawyer? 

"Yes,' Francis said. 

‘She's all right?’ 

‘Seems to be.’ .« 'What does she have to say for herself?’ 

'I don't know what you mean.’ 

'I hope you told her I said go to hell.’ 

Francis didn't answer. Charles picked up one of the books I had brought him 
and began to leaf through it sporadically. 

"Thanks for coming,’ he said. 'T'm kind of tired now.' 

'He looks awful,' said Francis in the car. 

‘There's got to be some way they can patch this up,' I said. 

‘Surely we can get Henry to call him and apologize.’ 

"What good do you think that's going to do? As long as Camilla's at the 
Albemarle?’ 

"Well, she doesn't know he's in the hospital, does she? This is kind of an 
emergency.’ 

'I don't know.’ 

The windshield wipers ticked back and forth. A cop in a rain slicker was 
directing traffic at the intersection. It was the cop with the red moustache. 
Recognizing Henry's car, he smiled at us and beckoned for us to go through. 
We smiled and waved back, happy day, two guys on a ride — then drove for a 
block or two in grim, superstitious silence. 

"There's got to be something we can do,' I said at last. 

'I think we had better stay out of it.' 

"You can't tell me that if she knew how sick he was, she wouldn't be over at 
the hospital in five minutes.’ 

Tm not kidding,’ said Francis. 'I think we both had better just stay out of it.' 

'Why?' 

But he only lit another cigarette and wouldn't say anything else, no matter 
how I grilled him. 

When I got back to my room I found Camilla sitting at my desk, reading a 
book. 'Hi,' she said, glancing up. "Your door was open. 

I hope you don't mind.’ 

Seeing her was like an electric shock. Unexpectedly I felt a surge of anger. 
Rain was blowing through the screen and I walked across the room to shut the 


window. 

"What are you doing here?’ I said. 

'I wanted to talk to you. 

"About what?’ 

"How's my brother?’ 

"Why don't you go see him yourself?’ 

She put down the book — ah, lovely, I thought helplessly, I loved her, I loved 
the very sight of her: she was wearing a cashmere sweater, soft gray-green, 
and her gray eyes had a luminous celadon tint. "You think you have to take 
sides,’ she said. ‘But you don't.’ 

Tm not taking sides. I just think whatever you're doing, you picked a bad 
time to do it.' 

‘And what would be a good time?’ she said. 'I want you to see something. 
Look.' 

She held up a piece of the light hair near her temples. Underneath was a 
scabbed spot about the size of a quarter where someone had, apparently, 
pulled a handful of hair out by the roots. I was too startled to say a thing. 

‘And this.’ She pushed up the sleeve of her sweater. The wrist was swollen 
and a bit discolored, but what horrified me was a tiny, evil burn on the 
underside of the forearm: a cigarette burn, gouged deep and ugly in the flesh. 

It was a moment before I found my voice. 'Good God, Camilla! 

Charles did this?’ 

She pulled the sleeve down. 'See what I mean?’ she said. Her voice was 
unemotional; her expression watchful, almost wry. 

"How long has this been going on?’ 

She ignored my question. 'I know Charles,’ she said. 'Better than you do. 
Staying away, just now, is much wiser.' 

"Whose idea was it that you stay at the Albemarle?’ 

Henry's.’ 

"How does he fit into this?’ 

She didn't answer. 

A horrible thought flashed across my mind. 'He didn't do this to you, did he?’ 
I said. 

She looked at me in surprise. 'No. Why would you think that?’ 

"How am I supposed to know what to think?’ 

The sun came suddenly from behind a rain cloud, flooding the room with 
glorious light that wavered on the walls like water. 

Camilla's face burst into glowing bloom. A terrible sweetness boiled up in 
me. Everything, for a moment — mirror, ceiling, floor — was unstable and 
radiant as a dream. I felt a fierce, nearly irresistible desire to seize Camilla by 
her bruised wrist, twist her arm behind her back until she cried out, throw her 
on my bed: strangle her, rape her, I don't know what. And then the cloud 
passed over the sun again, and the life went out of everything. 

"Why did you come here?’ I said. 


‘Because I wanted to see you.’ 

'I don't know if you care what I think' — I hated the sound of my voice, was 
unable to control it, everything I said was coming out in the same haughty, 
injured tone — 'I don't know if you care what I think, but I think you're making 
things worse by staying at the Albemarle.’ 

‘And what do you think I should do?’ 

"Why don't you stay with Francis?’ 

She laughed. "Because Charles bullies poor Francis to death,’ she said. 
‘Francis means well. I know that. But he couldn't stand up to Charles for five 
minutes. 

‘If you asked him, he'd give you the money to go somewhere.’ 

'I know he would. He offered to.' She reached in her pocket for a cigarette; 
with a pang I saw they were Lucky Strikes, Henry's brand. 

"You could take the money and stay wherever you like,' I said. 

"You wouldn't have to tell him where.’ 

‘Francis and I have gone over all this.’ She paused. 'The thing is, I'm afraid of 
Charles. And Charles is afraid of Henry. That's really all there is to it.' 

I was shocked by the coldness with which she said this. 

‘So is that it?' I said. 

"What do you mean?’ 

"You're protecting your own interests?’ 

"He tried to kill me,’ she said simply. Her eyes met mine, candid and clear. 

‘And is Henry not afraid of Charles too?’ 

"Why should he be?’ 

"You know. ' 

Once she realized what I meant, I was startled how quickly she leapt to his 
defense. 'Charles would never do that,’ she said, with childlike swiftness. 

‘Let's say he did. Went to the police.’ 

"But he wouldn't. 

"How do you know?’ 

‘And implicate the rest of us? Himself, too?’ 

‘At this point, I think he might not care." 

I said this intending to hurt her, and with pleasure I saw that I had. Her 
startled eyes met mine. ‘Maybe,’ she said. 'But you've got to remember, 
Charles is sick now. He's not himself. And the thing is, I believe he knows it.' 
She paused. 'I love Charles,’ she said. 'I love him, and I know him better than 
anybody in the world. But he's been under an awful lot of pressure, and when 
he's drinking like this, I don't know, he just becomes a different person. He 
won't listen to anybody; I don't know if he even remembers half the things he 
does. That's why I thank God he's in the hospital. If he has to stop for a day or 
two, maybe he'll start thinking straight again.’ 

What would she think, I wondered, if she knew that Henry was sending him 
whiskey. 

‘And do you think Henry really has Charles's best interest at heart?’ I said. 


‘Of course,’ she said, startled. 

‘And yours too?’ 

‘Certainly. Why shouldn't he?’ 

"You do have a lot of faith in Henry, don't you,’ I said. 

"He's never let me down.’ 

For some reason, I felt a fresh swell of anger. ‘And what about Charles?’ I 
said. 

'I don't know.’ 

"He'll be out of the hospital soon. You'll have to see him. 

What are you going to do then?’ 

"Why are you so angry at me, Richard?’ 

I glanced at my hand. It was trembling. I hadn't even realized it. I was 
trembling all over with rage. 

‘Please leave,’ I said. 'I wish you'd go.' 

"What's wrong?’ 

‘Just go. Please.’ 

She got up and took a step towards me. I stepped away. 'All right,’ she said, 
‘all right,’ and she turned around and left. 

It rained all day and the rest of the night. I took some sleeping pills and went 
to the movies: Japanese film, I couldn't seem to follow it. The characters 
loitered in deserted rooms, no one talking, everything silent for whole minutes 
except the hiss of the projector and rain pounding on the roof. The theater was 
empty except for a shadowy man in the back. Dust motes floated in the 
projector beam. It was raining when I came out, no stars, sky black as the 
ceiling of the movie house. The marquee lights melted on the wet pavement in 
long white gleams. I went back inside the glass doors to wait for my taxi, in 
the carpeted, popcorn-smelling lobby. I called Charles on the pay phone, but 
the hospital switchboard wouldn't put me through: it was past visiting hours, 
she said, everyone was sleeping. I was still arguing with her when the taxi 
pulled up at the curb, long slants of rain illumined in the headlights and the 
tires throwing up low fans of water. 

I dreamed about the stairs again that night. It was a dream I'd had often in the 
winter but seldom since. Once more, I was on the iron stairs at Leo's — rusted 
thin, no railing — except now they stretched down into a dark infinity and the 
steps were all different sizes: some tall, some short, some as narrow as the 
width of my shoe. The drop was bottomless on either side. For some reason, I 
had to hurry, though I was terrified of falling. Down and down. 

The stairs got more and more precarious, until finally they weren't even stairs 
at all; farther down — and for some reason this was always the most terrifying 
thing of all — a man was going down them, far'ahead of me, really fast... 

I woke around four, couldn't get back to sleep. Too many of Mrs Corcoran's 
tranquilizers: they'd started to backfire in my system, I was taking them in the 
daytime now, they wouldn't knock me out anymore. I got out of bed and sat 
by the window. 


My heartbeat trembled in my fingertips. Outside the black panes, past my 
ghost in the glass (Why so pale and wan, fond lover?) I heard the wind in the 
trees, felt the hills crowding around me in the dark. 

I wished I could stop myself from thinking. But all sorts of things had begun 
to occur to me. For instance: why had Henry let me in on this, only two 
months (it seemed years, a lifetime) before? Because it was obvious, now, that 
his decision to tell me was a calculated move. He had appealed to my vanity, 
allowing me to think I'd figured it out by myself (good for you, he'd said, 
leaning back in his chair; I could still remember the look on his face as he'd 
said it, good for you, you're just as smart as I'd thought you were); and I had 
congratulated myself in the glow of his praise, when in fact — I saw this now, 
I'd been too vain to see it then — he'd led me right to it, coaxing and flattering 
all the way. Perhaps — the thought crawled over me like a cold sweat — 
perhaps even my preliminary, accidental discovery had been engineered. The 
lexicon that had been misplaced, for instance: had Henry stolen it, knowing I'd 
come back for it? And the messy apartment I was sure to walk into; the flight 
numbers and so forth left deliberately, so it now seemed, by the phone; both 
were oversights unworthy of Henry. Maybe he'd wanted me to find out. 
Maybe he'd divined in me — correctly — this cowardice, this hideous pack 
instinct which would enable me to fall into step without question. 

And it wasn't just a question of having kept my mouth shut, I thought, 
staring with a sick feeling at my blurred reflection in the windowpane. 
Because they couldn't have done it without me. Bunny had come to me, and I 
had delivered him right into Henry's hands. And I hadn't even thought twice 
about it. 

"You were the alarm bell, Richard,’ Henry had said. 'I knew if he told 
anybody, he'd tell you first. And now that he has, I feel that we're in for an 
extremely rapid progression of events.’ 

An extremely rapid progression of events. My flesh crawled, remembering 
the ironic, almost humorous twist he'd put on the last words — oh, God, I 
thought, my God, how could I have listened to him? He was right, too, about 
the rapid part at least. 

Less than twenty-four hours later, Bunny was dead. And though I hadn't 
done the actual pushing — which had seemed an essential distinction at the 
time — now that didn't matter much anymore. 

I was still trying to force back the blackest thought of all; the merest 
suggestion of it sent the rat's feet of panic skittering up my spine. Had Henry 
intended to make me the patsy if his plan had fallen through? If so, I wasn't 
quite sure how he'd meant to manage it, but if he'd felt like doing it, there was 
no doubt in my mind he would have been able to. So much of what I knew 
was only secondhand, so much of it was only what he'd told me; there was an 
awful lot, when you got right down to it, that I didn't even know. And — 
though the immediate danger was apparently gone — there was no guarantee 
that it wouldn't surface again a year, twenty years, fifty years from now. I 


knew, from television, that there was no statute of limitations on murder. 

New evidence discovered. The case reopened. You read about these things 
all the time. 

It was still dark. Birds were chirping in the eaves. I pulled out my desk 
drawer and counted the rest of the sleeping pills: candy-colored pretties, 
bright on a sheet of typing paper. There were still quite a lot of them, plenty 
for my purposes. (Would Mrs Corcoran feel better if she knew this twist: that 
her stolen pills had killed her son's killer?) So easy, to feel them go down my 
throat: but blinking in the glare of my desk lamp, I was struck with a wave of 
revulsion so strong it was almost nausea. Horrific as it was, the present dark, I 
was afraid to leave it for the other, permanent dark — jelly and bloat, the 
muddy pit. I had seen the shadow of it on Bunny's face — stupid terror; the 
whole world opening upside down; his life exploding in a thunder of crows 
and the sky expanding empty over his stomach like a white ocean. Then 
nothing. Rotten stumps, sowbugs crawling in the fallen leaves. Dirt and dark. 

I lay on my bed. I felt my heart limping in my chest, and was revolted by it, 
a pitiful muscle, sick and bloody, pulsing against 55i my ribs. Rain streamed 
down the windowpanes. The lawn out « side was sodden, swampy. When the 
sun came up, I saw, in the ™ small, cold light of dawn, that the flagstones 
outside were covered with earthworms: delicate, nasty, hundreds of them, 
twisting blind and helpless on the rain-dark sheets of slate. 

In class on Tuesday, Julian mentioned he'd spoken to Charles on the 
telephone. 'You're right,’ he murmured. 'He doesn't sound well. Very groggy 
and confused, don't you think? I suppose they have him under sedation?’ He 
smiled, sifting through his papers. 

‘Poor Charles. I asked where Camilla was — I wanted to get her on the line, I 
couldn't make any sense of what he was trying to tell me — and he said’ — (here 
his voice changed slightly, in imitation of Charles, a stranger might assume; 
but it was really Julian's own voice, cultured and purring, only raised slightly 
in tone, as if he could not bear, even in mimicry, to substantively alter its own 
melodious cadence) — ‘he said, in the most melancholy voice, «She's hiding 
from me.» He was dreaming, of course. 

I thought it was rather sweet. So, to humor him, I said, «Well, then. You 
must hide your eyes and count to ten and she'll come back." 

He laughed. 'But he got angry at me. It was really rather charming of him. 
«No,» he said, «no she won't.» 

«But you're dreaming,» I said to him. «No,» he said, «no I'm not. It's not a 
dream. It's real." 

The doctors couldn't figure out quite what was wrong with Charles. They'd 
tried two antibiotics over the course of the week, but the infection — whatever 
it was — didn't respond. The third try was more successful. Francis, who went 
to see him Wednesday and Thursday, was told that Charles was improving, 
and that if everything went well he could come home over the weekend. 

About ten o'clock on Friday, after another sleepless night, I walked over to 


Francis's. It was a hot, overcast morning, trees shimmering in the heat. I felt 
haggard and exhausted. The warm air vibrated with the thrum of wasps and 
the drone of lawn mowers. Swifts chased and chittered, in fluttering pairs, 
through the sky. 

My head hurt. I wished I had a pair of sunglasses. I wasn't supposed to meet 
Francis until eleven-thirty but my room was a wreck, I hadn't done laundry in 
weeks; it was too hot to do anything more taxing than lie on my tangled bed, 
and sweat, and try to ignore the bass of my neighbor's stereo thumping 
through the wall. Jud and Frank were building some enormous, ramshackle, 
modernistic structure out on Commons lawn, and the hammers and the power 
drills had started early in the morning. 

I didn't know what it was — I had heard, variously, that it was a stage set, a 
sculpture, a Stonehenge-type monument to the Grateful Dead — but the first 
time I had looked out my window, dazed with Fiorinal, and seen the upright 
support posts rising stark from the lawn, I was flooded with black, irrational 
terror: gibbets, I thought, they're putting up gibbets, they're having a hanging 
on Commons lawn... The hallucination was over in a moment, but in a 
strange way it had persisted, manifesting itself in different lights like one of 
those pictures on the cover of horror paperbacks in the supermarket: turned 
one way, a smiling blond-haired child; turned the other, a skull in flames. 
Sometimes the structure was mundane, silly, perfectly harmless; though early 
in the morning, say, or around twilight, the world would drop away and there 
loomed a gallows, medieval and black, birds wheeling low in the skies 
overhead. At night, it cast its long shadow over what fitful sleep I was able to 
get. 

The problem, basically, was that I had been taking too many pills; the ups 
now, periodically, mixed with the downs, because though the latter had ceased 
to put me effectively to sleep, they hung me over in the daytime, so that I 
wandered in a perpetual twilight. Unmedicated sleep was impossible, a fairy 
tale, some remote childhood dream. But I was running low on the downs; and 
though I knew I could probably get some more, from Cloke, or Bram, or 
somebody, I'd decided to cut them out for a couple of days — a good idea, in 
the abstract, but it was excruciating to emerge from my eerie submarine 
existence into this harsh stampede of noise and light. The world jangled with a 
sharp, discordant clarity: green everywhere, sweat and sap, weeds pushing 
through the spattered cracks of the old marble sidewalk; veined white slabs, 
heaved and buckled by a century's worth of hard January freezes. A 
millionaire had put them down, those marble walks, a man who summered in 
North Hampden and threw himself from a window on Park Avenue in the 
19205. 

Behind the mountains the sky was overcast, dark as slate. There was pressure 
in the air; rain coming, sometime soon. Geraniums blazed from the white 
housefronts, the red of them, against the chalky clapboard, fierce and 
harrowing. 


I turned down Water Street, which ran north past Henry's house, and as I 
approached I saw a dark shadow in the back of his garden. No, I thought. 

But it was. He was on his knees with a pail of water, and a cloth, and as I 
drew nearer I saw that he was washing not the flagstones, as I'd thought at 
first, but a rosebush. He was bent over it, polishing the leaves with meticulous 
care, like some crazed gardener from Alice in Wonderland. 

I thought that any moment he must stop, but he didn't, and finally I let myself 
in through the back gate. 'Henry,' I said. 'What are you doing?’ 

He glanced up, calmly, not at all surprised to see me. 'Spider mites,’ he said. 
"We've had a damp spring. I've sprayed them twice, but to get the eggs off it's 
best to wash them by hand.’ He dropped the cloth in the pail. I noted, not for 
the first time lately, how well he looked, how his stiff sad manner had relaxed 
into a more natural one. I had never thought Henry handsome — indeed, I'd 
always thought that only the formality of his bearing saved him from 
mediocrity, as far as looks went — but now, less rigid, I and lockcd-up in his 
movements, he had a sure, tigerish grace the swiftness and ease of which 
surprised me. A lock of hair blew upon his forehead. 'This is a Reine des 
Violettes,’ he said, indicating the rosebush. 'A lovely old rose. Introduced in 
1860. 

And that is a Madame Isaac Pereire. The flowers smell of raspberries.' 

I said: 'Is Camilla here? 

There was no trace of emotion upon his face, or of any effort to conceal it. 
'No,' he said, turning back to his work. 'She was sleeping when I left. I didn't 
want to wake her.' 

It was shocking to hear him speak of her with such intimacy. 

Pluto and Persephone. I looked at his back, prim as a parson's, tried to 
imagine the two of them together. His big white hands with the square nails. 

Henry said, unexpectedly: 'How is Charles?’ 

"All right,’ I said, after an awkward pause. 

"He'll be coming home soon, I suppose.’ 

A dirty tarpaulin flapped loudly on the roof. He kept working. 

His dark trousers, with the suspenders crossed over his white shirted back, 
gave him a vaguely Amish appearance. 

‘Henry,’ I said. 

He didn't look up. 

"Henry, it's none of my business, but I hope for God's sake you know what 
you're doing,’ I said. I paused, expecting some response, but there was none. 
"You haven't seen Charles, but I have, and I don't think you realize the shape 
he's in. Ask Francis, if you don't believe me. Even Julian's noticed. I mean, 
I've tried to tell you, but I just don't think you understand. He's out of his 
mind, and Camilla has no idea, and I don't know what we'll do when he gets 
home. I'm not even sure he'll be able to stay by himself. I mean ' 

Tm sorry,’ interrupted Henry, 'but would you mind handing me those 
shears? 


There was a long silence. Finally, he reached over and got them himself. 'All 
right,’ he said pleasantly. 'Never mind.’ Very conscientiously, he parted the 
canes and clipped one in the middle, holding the shears at a careful slant, 
taking care not to injure a larger cane adjacent to it. 

"What the hell is wrong with you?' I had a hard time keeping my voice down. 
There were windows open in the upstairs apartment that faced the back; I 
heard people talking, listening to the radio, moving around. 'Why do you have 
to make things so hard for everybody?’ He didn't turn around. I grabbed the 
shears from his hand and threw them, with a clatter, on the bricks. 'Answer 
me,' I said. 

We looked at each other for a long moment. Behind his glasses, his eyes 
were steady and very blue. 

Finally, he said, quietly: 'Tell me.' 

The intensity of his gaze frightened me. 'What?' 

"You don't feel a great deal of emotion for other people, do you?’ 

I was taken aback. 'What are you talking about?’ I said. ‘Of course I do.' 

‘Do you?' He raised an eyebrow. 'I don't think so. It doesn't matter,’ he said, 
after a long, tense pause. 'I don't, either.’ 

"What are you trying to get at?’ 

He shrugged. 'Nothing,’ he said. 'Except that my life, for the most part, has 
been very stale and colorless. Dead, I mean. The world has always been an 
empty place to me. I was incapable of enjoying even the simplest things. I felt 
dead in everything I did.’ 

He brushed the dirt from his hands. 'But then it changed,’ he said. "The night 
I killed that man.' 

I was jarred — a little spooked, as well — at so blatant a reference to 
something referred to, by mutual agreement, almost exclusively with codes, 
catchwords, a hundred different euphemisms. 

‘It was the most important night of my life,’ he said calmly. 'It enabled me to 
do what I've always wanted most.’ 

"Which is?’ 

"To live without thinking.’ 

Bees buzzed loudly in the honeysuckle. He went back to his rosebush, 
thinning the smaller branches at the top. 

‘Before, I was paralyzed, though I didn't really know it,’ he said. ‘It was 
because I thought too much, lived too much in the mind. It was hard to make 
decisions. I felt immobilized. 

‘And now?’ 

"Now, ' he said, 'now, I know that I can do anything that I want.' He glanced 
up. ‘And, unless I'm very wrong, you've experienced something similar 
yourself 'I don't know what you're talking about.' 

‘Oh, but I think you do. That surge of power and delight, of confidence, of 
control. That sudden sense of the richness of the world. Its infinite possibility.’ 

He was talking about the ravine. And, to my horror, 1 realized that in a way 


he was right. As ghastly as it had been, there was no denying that Bunny's 
murder had thrown all subsequent events into a kind of glaring Technicolor. 
And, though this new lucidity of vision was frequently nerve-wracking, there 
was no denying that it was not an altogether unpleasant sensation. 

'I don't understand what this has to do with anything,’ I said, to his back. 

Tm not sure that I do, either,’ he said, assessing the balance of his rosebush, 
then removing, very carefully, another cane in the center. ‘Except that there's 
not much which matters a great deal. The last six months have made that 
plain. And lately it has seemed important to find a thing or two which do. 
That's all.' 

As he said this, he trailed away. 'There,' he said at last. 'Does that look all 
right? Or do I need to open it up more in the middle?’ 

‘Henry,’ I said. 'Listen to me. 

'I don't want to take off too much,’ he said vaguely. 'I should have done this a 
month ago. The canes bleed if they're pruned this late, but better late than 
never, as they say. 

"Henry. Please.’ I was on the verge of tears. 'What's the matter with you? 
Have you lost your mind? Don't you understand what's going on?’ 

He stood up, dusted his hands on his trousers. 'I have to go in the house now, ' 
he said. 

I watched him hang the shears on a peg, then walk away. At the last, I 
thought he was going to turn and say something, goodbye, anything. But he 
didn't. He went inside. The door shut behind him. 

I found Francis's apartment darkened, razor slits of light showing through the 
closed Venetian blinds. He was asleep. The place smelled sour, and ashy. 
Cigarette butts floated in a gin glass. 

There was a black, bubbled scorch in the varnish of the night table beside his 
bed. 

I pulled the blinds to let some sun in. He rubbed his eyes, J| called me a 
strange name. Then he recognized me. 'Oh,' he said, his face screwed up, 
albino-pale. "You. What are you doing here?’ 

I reminded him that we had agreed to visit Charles. 

"What day is it?’ 

'Friday,' 'Friday.' He slumped back down in the bed. 'I hate Fridays. 

Wednesdays, too. Bad luck. Sorrowful Mystery on the Rosary.’ 

He lay in bed, staring at the ceiling. Then he said: 'Do you get the sense 
something really awful is about to happen?’ 

I was alarmed. 'No,' I said, defensively, though this was far from true. 'What 
do you think’s going to happen?’ 

'I don't know,’ he said without moving. 'Maybe I'm wrong.’ 

"You should open a window,’ I said. 'It smells in here,’ 'I don't care. I can't 
smell. I've got a sinus infection.’ Listlessly, with one hand, he groped for his 
cigarettes on the night table. ‘Jesus, I'm depressed,’ he said. 'I can't handle 
seeing Charles right now,’ 'We've got to,’ 'What time is it?’ 


‘About eleven,' He was silent for a moment, then said: 'Look here. I've got an 
idea. Let's have some lunch. Then we'll do it.’ 

"We'll worry about it the whole time. 

‘Let's ask Julian, then. I'll bet he'll come.' 

"Why do you want to ask Julian?’ 

Tm depressed. Always nice to see him, anyway.’ He rolled over on his 
stomach. 'Or maybe not. I don't know.’ 

Julian answered the door — just a crack, as he had the very first time I'd 
knocked — and opened it wide when he saw who it was. 

Immediately Francis asked him if he wanted to come to lunch. 

‘Of course. I'd be delighted.’ He laughed. "This has been an odd morning 
indeed. Most peculiar. I'll tell you about it on the way.' 

Things which were odd, by Julian's definition, often turned out to be 
amusingly mundane. By his own choice, he had so little contact with the 
outside world that he frequently considered the commonplace to be bizarre: an 
automatic-teller machine, for instance, or some new peculiarity in the 
supermarket — cereal shaped like vampires, or unrefrigerated yogurt sold in 
pop-top cans. All of us enjoyed hearing about these little forays of his into the 
twentieth century, so Francis and I pressed him to tell us what now had 
happened. 

"Well, the secretary from the Literature and Languages Division was just 
here,’ he said. 'She had a letter for me. They have in and out boxes, you know, 
in the literature office — one can leave things to be typed or pick up messages 
there, though I never do. Anyone with whom I have the slightest wish to talk 
knows to reach me here. This letter’ — he indicated it, lying open on the table 
beside his reading glasses — 'which was meant for me, somehow wound up in 
the box of a Mr Morse, who apparently is on sabbatical. His son came round 
to pick up his mail this morning and found it had been put by mistake into his 
father's slot.’ 

"What kind of letter?’ said Francis, leaning closer. 'Who's it from?’ 

‘Bunny,’ Julian said. 

A bright knife of terror plunged through my heart. We stared at him, 
dumbstruck. Julian smiled at us, allowing a dramatic pause for our 
astonishment to blossom to the full. 

"Well, of course, it's not really from Edmund, ' he said. 'It's a forgery, and not 
a very clever one. The thing is typewritten, and there's no signature or date. 
That doesn't seem quite legitimate, does it?’ 

Francis had found his voice. Typewritten?’ he said. 

"Yes. 

‘Bunny didn't own a typewriter.’ 

"Well, he was my student for nearly four years, and he never handed in 
anything typewritten to me. As far as I'm aware, he didn't know how to type- 
write at all. Or did he?' he said, looking up shrewdly. 

‘No,’ said Francis, after an earnest, thoughtful pause, 'no, I think you're right’; 


and I echoed this, though I knew — and Francis knew, too — that as a matter of 
fact Bunny had known how to type. He didn't have a typewriter of his own — 
this was perfectly true; but he frequently borrowed Francis's, or used one of 
the sticky old manuals in the library. The fact was — though neither of us was 
about to point it out — that none of us, ever, gave typed things to Julian. There 
was a simple reason for this. It was impossible to write in Greek alphabet on 
an English typewriter; and though Henry actually had somewhere a little 
Greek alphabet portable, which he had purchased on holiday in Mykonos, he 
never used it because, as he explained to me, the keyboard was different from 
the English and it took him five minutes to type his own name. 

‘It's terribly sad that someone would want to play a trick like this,’ Julian 
said. 'I can't imagine who would do such a thing.’ 

"How long had it been in the mailbox?' Francis said. 'Do you know?’ 

"Well, that's another thing,’ Julian said. ‘It might have been put in at any time. 
The secretary said that Mr Morse's son hadn't been to check his father's box 
since March. Which means, of course, that it might have been slipped in 
yesterday.’ He indicated the envelope, on the table. "You see. There's only my 
name, typewritten, on the front, no return address, no date, of course no 
postmark. Obviously it's the work of a crank. The thing is, though, I can't 
imagine why anyone would play such a cruel joke. I'd almost like to tell the 
Dean, though goodness knows I don't want to stir things up again after all that 
fuss.’ 

Now that the first, horrible shock was over, I was starting to breathe a bit 
easier. 'What sort of a letter is it?’ I asked him. 

Julian shrugged. "You can have a look at it, if you like.’ 

I picked it up. Francis looked at it over my shoulder. It was single-spaced, on 
five or six small sheets of paper, some of which looked not unlike some 
writing paper which Bunny used to have. 

But though the sheets were roughly the same size, they didn't all match. I 
could tell, by the way the ribbon had struck a letter sometimes half-red and 
half-black, that it had been written on the typewriter in the all-night study 
room. 

The letter itself was disjointed, incoherent, and — to my astonished eyes — 
unquestionably genuine. I skimmed it only briefly, and remember so little 
about it that I am unable to reproduce it here, but I do remember thinking that 
if Bunny wrote it, he was a lot closer to a breakdown than any of us had 
thought. It was filled with profanities of various sorts which it was difficult, 
even in the most desperate of circumstances, to imagine Bunny using in a 
letter to Julian. It was unsigned, but there were several clear references which 
made it plain that Bunny Corcoran, or someone purporting to be him, was the 
author. It was badly spelled, with a great many of Bunny's characteristic 
errors, which fortunately couldn't have meant much to Julian, as Bunny was 
such a poor writer that he usually had someone else go over his work before 
he handed it in. Even I might have had doubts about the 56i authorship, the 


thing was so garbled and paranoid, if not for the reference to the Battenkill 
murder: 'He' — (Henry, that is. or so the letter ran approximately at one point) 
—'is a fucking Monster. 

He has killed a man and he wants to kill Me, too. Everybody is in on it. The 
man they killed in October, in Battenkill county. 

His name was Mc Ree. I think they beat him to death I am not sure.’ There 
were other accusations — some of them true (the twins’ sexual practices), some 
not; all of which were so wild that they only served to discredit the whole. 
There was no mention of my name. The whole thing had a desperate, drunken 
tone that was not unfamiliar. Though this didn't occur to me until later, I now 
believe he must have gone to the all-night study room and written it on the 
same night that he came drunk to my room - either directly before or after, 
probably after — in which case it was a pure stroke of luck we didn't run into 
each other when I was on my way to the Science Building to telephone Henry. 
I remember only one other thing, which was its closing line, and the only 
thing I saw which struck a pang at me: 'Please Help me, this is why I wrote 
you, you are the only person that can.' 

"Well, I don't know who wrote this,’ said Francis at last, his tone offhand and 
perfectly casual, 'but whoever they were, they certainly couldn't spell.’ 

Julian laughed. I knew he didn't have the slightest idea that the letter was 
real. 

Francis took the letter and shuffled ruminatively through the pages. He 
stopped at the next-to-last sheet — which was of a slightly different color than 
the rest — and idly turned it over. 'It seems that —' he said, and then stopped. 

‘Seems that what?’ said Julian pleasantly. 

There was a slight pause before Francis continued. 'Seems that whoever 
wrote this needed a new typewriter ribbon,’ he said; but that was not what he 
was thinking, or I was thinking, or what he had been about to say. That had 
been struck from his mind when, turning the irregular sheet over, the two of 
us saw, with horror, what was on the back of it. It was a sheet of hotel 
stationery, engraved, at the top, with the address and letterhead of the 
Excelsior: the hotel where Bunny and Henry had stayed in Rome. 

Henry told us, later, head in hands, that Bunny had asked him to buy him 
another box of stationery the day before he died. It was expensive stuff, white 
cream laid, imported from England; the best they had at the store in town. 'If 
only I'd bought it for him,' he said. 'He asked me half a dozen times. But I 
figured, there wasn't much point, you see...’ The sheet from the Excelsior 
wasn't quite so heavy, or fine. Henry speculated — probably correctly — that 
Bunny had got to the bottom of the box, so he rooted around in his desk and 
found that piece, roughly the same size, and turned it over to use the back. 

I tried not to look at it, but it kept obtruding at the corners of my vision. A 
palace, drawn in blue ink, with flowing script like the script on an Italian 
menu. Blue edges on the paper. 

Unmistakable. 


'To tell you the truth,’ said Julian, 'I didn't even finish reading it. Obviously 
the perpetrator of this is quite disturbed. One can't say, of course, but I think it 
must have been written by another student, don't you?’ 

‘I can't imagine that a member of the faculty would write something like this, 
if that's what you mean,' said Francis, turning the letterhead back over. We 
didn't look at each other. I knew exactly what he was thinking: how can we 
steal this page? how can we get it away? 

To distract Julian's attention, I walked to the window. 'It's a beautiful day, 
isn't it?’ I said, my back to both of them. 'It's hard to believe there was snow 
on the ground hardly a month ago...’ 

I babbled on, hardly aware of what I was saying, and afraid to look around. 

"Yes,' said Julian politely, 'yes, it is lovely out,’ but his voice came not from 
where I was expecting it but farther away, near the bookcase. I turned and saw 
that he was putting on his coat. 

From the look on Francis's face, I knew he hadn't succeeded. He was turned 
halfway, watching Julian from the corner of his eye; for a moment, when 
Julian turned his head to cough, it seemed like he was going to be able to get 
away with it but no sooner had he pulled the page out than Julian turned 
around, and he had no choice but to casually place it where it had been, as if 
the pages were out of order and he was simply rearranging them. 

Julian smiled at us, by the door. 'Are you boys ready?’ he said. 

‘Certainly,’ said Francis, with more enthusiasm than I knew he felt. He laid 
the letter, folded, back on the table and the two of us followed him out, 
smiling and talking, though I could see the tension in the back of Francis's 
shoulders and I was biting the inside of my bottom lip with frustration. 

It was a miserable lunch. I remember hardly anything about it except that it 
was a very bright day, and we sat at a table too close to the window, and the 
glare in my eyes only increased my confusion and discomfort. And all the 
time we talked about the letter, the letter, the letter. Might whoever sent it 
have a grudge against Julian? Or was someone angry at us? Francis was more 
composed than me, but he was downing the glasses of house wine one after 
another, and a light sweat had broken out on his forehead. 

Julian thought the letter was a fake. That was obvious. But if he saw the 
letterhead, the game was up, because he knew as well as we did that Bunny 
and Henry had stayed at the Excelsior for a couple of weeks. Our best hope 
was that he would simply throw it away, without showing it to anyone else or 
examining it further. But Julian liked intrigue, and secrecy, and this was the 
sort of thing that could keep him speculating for days. (No. Could it have 
been a faculty member? Do you think?') I kept thinking about what he'd said 
earlier, about showing it to the Dean. We would have to get hold of it 
somehow. Break in his office, maybe. 

But even assuming he left it there, in a place where we could find it, that 
meant waiting six or seven hours. 

I drank a good deal during lunch, but by the time we were finished I was still 


so nervous that I had brandy with my dessert instead of coffee. Twice, Francis 
slipped away to telephone. I knew he was trying to get Henry, to ask him to 
go over to the office and nip the letter while we had Julian captive at the 
Brasserie; I knew also, from his tense smiles when he returned, that he wasn't 
having any luck. After the second time he came back, an idea occurred to me: 
if he could leave to telephone, why couldn't he just go out the back and get in 
his car and go get it himself? I would have slipped out and done it myself if I 
had only had the car keys. Too late — as Francis was paying the check — I 
realized what I should have said: that I'd left something in the car and needed 
the keys to go unlock the door and get it. 

On the way back to school, in the charged silence, I realized that something 
we had always relied on was the ability to communicate whenever we wanted. 
Always, previously, in an emergency we could throw out something in Greek, 
under the guise of an aphorism or quotation. But now that was impossible. 

Julian didn't invite us back up to his office. We watched him going up the 
walk, waved as he turned at the back door to the Lyceum. It was, by now, 
about one-thirty in the afternoon. 

We sat motionless in the car for a moment after he disappeared. 

Francis's chummy, goodbye smile had died on his face. Suddenly, and with a 
violence that frightened me, he leaned down and banged his forehead on the 
steering wheel. 'Shit!' he yelled. ‘Shit! 

Shit!’ 

I grabbed his arm and shook it. 'Shut up,’ I said. 

‘Oh, shit,’ he wailed, rolling his head back, the heels of his hands pressed to 
his temples. 'Shit. This is it, Richard.’ 

‘Shut up. 

‘It's over. We've had it. We're going to jail.’ 

‘Shut up,’ 1 said again. His panic, oddly, had sobered me. 

"We've got to figure out what to do. 

‘Look,’ said Francis. 'Let's just go. If we leave now we can be in Montreal by 
dark. Nobody will ever find us.' 

"You're not making any sense.’ 

"We'll stay in Montreal a couple of days. Sell the car. Then take the bus to, I 
don't know, Saskatchewan or something. We'll go to the weirdest place we 
can find.' 

‘Francis, I wish you would calm down for a minute. I think we can handle 
this.’ 

"What are we going to do?’ 

"Well, first, I think, we've got to find Henry.’ 

‘Henry?’ He looked at me in amazement. 'What makes you think he'll be any 
help? He's so whacked-out, he doesn't know which way —' 

"Doesn't he have a key to Julian's office?’ 

He was quiet a moment. 'Yes,' he said. 'Yes, I think he does. 

Or he used to. 


"There you go,' I said. 'We'll find Henry and drive him over here. He can 
make some excuse to get Julian out of the office. 

Then one of us can slip up the back stairs with the key.’ 

It was a good plan. The only problem was, running Henry down wasn't so 
easy as we'd hoped. He wasn't at his apartment, and when we went by the 
Albemarle, his car wasn't there. 

We drove back to campus to check the library, then back to the Albemarle. 
This time Francis and I got out of the car and walked around the grounds. 

The Albemarle had been built in the nineteenth century, as a retreat for rich 
convalescents. It was shady and luxurious, with tall shutters and a big, cool 
porch — everyone from Rudyard Kipling to FDR had stayed there — but it 
wasn't much bigger than a big private house. 

"You tried the desk clerk?’ 1 asked Francis. 

‘Don't even think about it. They're registered under a phony name, and I'm 
sure Henry gave the innkeeper some story, because when I tried to talk to her 
the other night she clammed up in a second. 

‘Is there any way we can get in past the lobby?’ 

'I have no idea. My mother and Chris stayed here once. It isn't that big a 
place. There's only one set of stairs that I know of, and you have to walk past 
the desk to get to them.' 

"What about downstairs?’ 

‘The thing is, I think they're on an upper floor. Camilla said something about 
carrying bags upstairs. There might be fire stairs, but I wouldn't know how to 
go about finding them. 

We stepped up onto the porch. Through the screen door we could see a dark, 
cool lobby and, behind the desk, a man of about sixty, his half-moon glasses 
pulled low on his nose, reading a copy of the Bennington Banner. 

‘Is that the guy you talked to?’ I whispered. 

"No. His wife.’ 

‘Has he seen you before?’ 

'No.' 

I pushed open the door and stuck my head in for a moment, then went inside. 
The innkeeper glanced from his paper and gave us a supercilious up-and- 
down look. He was one of those prissy retirees one sees frequently in New 
England, the sort who subscribe to antique magazines and carry those canvas 
tote bags they give as gift premiums on public TV. 

I gave him my best smile. Behind the desk, I noticed, was a pegboard with 
room keys. They were arranged in tiers according to floor. There were three 
keys — 2-B, —C, and —E — missing on the second floor, and only one — 3-A — 
on the third. 

He was looking at us frostily. 'How may I help you?’ he said. 

"Excuse me,’ I said, 'but do you know if our parents have arrived yet from 
California?’ 

He was surprised. He opened a ledger. 'What's the name?’ 


"Rayburn. Mr and Mrs Cloke Rayburn. 

'I don't see a reservation. 

T'm not sure they made one.' 

He looked at me over the tops of his glasses. ‘Generally, we require a 
reservation, with deposit, at least forty-eight hours in advance,’ he said. 

"They didn't think they'd need one this time of year. 

"Well, there's no guarantee that there'll be room for them when they arrive,’ 
he said curtly. 

I would have liked to have pointed out that his inn was more than half- 
empty, and that I didn't see the guests exactly fighting to get in, but I smiled 
again and said, 'I guess they'll have to take their chances, then. Their plane got 
into Albany at noon. They should be here any minute.’ 

"Well, then.' 

‘Do you mind if we wait?’ 

Obviously, he did. But he couldn't say so. He nodded, his mouth pursed — 
thinking, no doubt, about the lecture on reservation policy he would deliver to 
my parents — and, with an ostentatious rattle, went back to his paper. 

We sat down on a cramped Victorian sofa, as far from the desk as possible. 

Francis was jittery and kept glancing around. 'I don't want to stay here,’ he 
whispered, his lips barely moving, close to my ear. 

Tm afraid the wife will come back." 

"This guy is from hell, isn't he?’ 

‘She's worse.’ 

The innkeeper was, very pointedly, not looking in our direction. 

In fact, his back was to us. I put my hand on Francis's arm. 

I'll be right back,’ I whispered. 'Tell him I went looking for the men's room.’ 

The stairs were carpeted and I managed to get up them without making much 
noise. I hurried down the corridor until I f saw 2-C, and 2.-B next to it. The 
doors were blank and foreboding, but this was no time to hesitate. I knocked 
oil 2-C. No answer. I knocked again, louder this time. 'Camilla!' I said. 

At this, a small dog began to raise a racket, down the hall in 2-E. Nix that, I 
thought, and was about to knock on the third door, when suddenly it opened 
and there stood a middle-aged lady in a golfing skirt. 'Excuse me,’ she said. 
‘Are you looking for someone?’ 

It was funny, 1 thought, as I shot up the last flight of stairs, but I'd had a 
premonition they'd be on the top floor. In the corridor I passed a gaunt, 
sixtyish woman — print dress, harlequin glasses, sharp nasty face like a poodle 
— carrying a stack of folded towels. 

"Wait!' she yelped. 'Where are you going?’ 

But I was already past her, down the hall, banging at the door of 3-A. 
‘Camilla!' I shouted. 'It's Richard! Let me in!' 

And then, there she was, like a miracle: sunlight streaming behind her into 
the hall, barefoot and blinking with surprise. 

‘Hello,’ she said, ‘hello! What are you doing here?’ And, behind my shoulder, 


the innkeeper's wife: "What do you think you're doing here? Who are you?’ 

‘It's all right,’ Camilla said. 

I was out of breath. 'Let me in,' I gasped. 

She pulled the door shut. It was a beautiful room — oak wainscoting, 
fireplace, only one bed, I noticed, in the room beyond, bedclothes tangled at 
the foot... 'Is Henry here?' I said. 

"What's wrong?’ Bright circles of color burned high in her cheeks. 'It's 
Charles, isn't it? What's happened?’ 

Charles. I'd forgotten about him. I struggled to catch my breath. 

'No,' I said. 'I don't have time to explain. We've got to find Henry. Where is 
he?’ 

"Why' — she looked at the clock — 'I believe he's at Julian's office.’ 

‘Julian's: 1' 

"Yes. What's the matter?’ she said, seeing the astonishment on my face. 'He 
had an appointment, I think, at two.' 

I hurried downstairs to get Francis before the innkeeper and his wife had a 
chance to compare notes. 

"What should we do?' said Francis on the drive back to school. 

"Wait outside and watch for him?’ 

Tm afraid we'll lose him. I think one of us better run up and get him.’ 

Francis lit a cigarette. The match flame wavered. 'Maybe it's okay,’ he said. 
"Maybe Henry managed to get hold of it.’ 

'I don't know,’ I said. But I was thinking the same thing. If Henry saw the 
letterhead, I was pretty sure he'd try to take it, and I was pretty sure he'd be 
more efficient about it than Francis or me. Besides — it sounded petty but it 
was true — Henry was Julian's favorite. If he put his mind to it, he could coerce 
away the whole letter on some pretext of giving it to the police, having the 
typing analyzed, who knew what he might come up with? 

Francis glanced at me sideways. 'If Julian found out about this,’ he said, 
‘what do you think he would do?’ 

'I don't know,’ I said, and I didn't. It was such an unthinkable prospect that 
the only responses I could imagine him having were melodramatic and 
improbable. Julian suffering a fatal heart attack. Julian weeping 
uncontrollably, a broken man. 

'I can't believe he'd turn us in. 

'I don't know.’ 

"But he couldn't. He loves us.' 

I didn't say anything. Regardless of what Julian felt for me, there was no 
denying that what I felt for him was love and trust of a very genuine sort. As 
my own parents had distanced themselves from me more and more — a retreat 
they had been in the process of effecting for many years — it was Julian who 
had grown to be the sole figure of paternal benevolence in my life, or, indeed, 
of benevolence of any sort. To me, he seemed my only protector in the world. 

It was a mistake,’ said Francis. 'He has to understand,’ 'Maybe,' I said. I 


couldn't conceive of his finding out, but as I tried to visualize myself 
explaining this catastrophe to someone, I realized that we would have an 
easier time explaining it to Julian than to anyone else. Perhaps, I thought, his 
reaction would be similar to my own. Perhaps he would see these murders as 
a sad, wild thing, haunted and picturesque (Tve done everything,’ old Tolstoy 
used to boast, 'I've even killed a man’), instead of the basically selfish, evil act 
which it was. 

"You know that thingjulian used to say,’ said Francis. 

"Which thing?’ 

‘About a Hindu saint being able to slay a thousand on the battlefield and it 
not being a sin unless he felt remorse. 

I had heard Julian say this, but had never understood what he meant. "We're 
not Hindus,’ I said. 

‘Richard,’ Julian said, in a tone which simultaneously welcomed me and let 
me know that I had come at a bad time. 

Is Henry here? I need to talk to him about something.’ 

He looked surprised. 'Of course,’ he said, and opened the door. 

Henry was sitting at the table where we did our Greek. Julian's empty chair, 
on the side by the window, was pulled close to his. 

There were other papers on the table but the letter was in front of them. He 
glanced up. He did not look pleased to see me. 

"Henry, may I speak to you?’ 

‘Certainly,’ he said coldly. 

I turned, to step into the hall, but he didn't make a move to follow. He was 
avoiding my eye. Damn him, I thought. He thought I was trying to continue 
our earlier conversation in the garden. 

‘Could you come out here for a minute?’ I said. 

"What is it?’ 

'I need to tell you something.’ 

He raised an eyebrow. 'You mean, it's something you want to tell me in 
private? he said. 

1 could have killed him. Julian, politely, had been pretending not to follow 
this exchange, but his curiosity was aroused by this. 

He was standing, waiting, behind his chair. 'Oh, dear,’ he said. 'I hope 
nothing's wrong. Shall I leave?’ 

‘Oh, no, Julian,’ said Henry, looking not at Julian but at me. 

"Don't bother.’ 

‘Is everything all right?’ Julian asked me. 

"Yes, yes,’ I said. 'I just need to see Henry for a second. It's kind of 
important.’ 

‘Can't it wait?' said Henry. 

The letter was spread out on the table. With horror, I saw that he was turning 
through it slowly, like a book, pretending to examine the pages one by one. 
He hadn't seen the letterhead. 


He didn't know it was there. 

‘Henry,’ I said. 'It's an emergency. I have to talk to you right now.’ 

He was struck by the urgency in my voice. He stopped, and pivoted in his 
chair to look at me — they were both staring now — and as he did, as part of the 
motion of turning, he turned over the page in his hand. My heart did a 
somersault. There was the letterhead, face-up on the table. White palace 
drawn in blue curlicues. 

‘All right, said Henry. Then, to Julian: ‘I'm sorry. We'll be back in a 
moment.' 

‘Certainly,’ said Julian. He looked grave and concerned. 'I hope nothing's the 
matter.’ 

I wanted to cry. I had Henry's attention; I had it, now, but I didn't want it. 
The letterhead lay exposed on the table. 

"What's wrong?’ said Henry, his eyes locked on mine. 

He was attentive, poised as a cat. Julian was looking at me too. The letter lay 
on the table, between them, directly in Julian's line of vision. He had only to 
glance down. 

I darted my eyes at the letter, then at Henry. He understood in an instant, 
turned smooth but fast; but he wasn't fast enough, and in that split-second, 
Julian looked down — casually, just an afterthought, but a second too soon. 

I do not like to think about the silence that followed. Julian leaned over and 
looked at the letterhead for a long time. Then he picked up the page and 
examined it. Excekior. Via Veneto. Blue-inked battlements. I felt curiously 
light and empty-headed. 

Julian put on his glasses and sat down. He looked through the whole thing, 
very carefully, front and back. I heard kids laughing, faintly, somewhere 
outside. At last he folded the letter and put it in the inside pocket of his jacket. 

"Well,' he said at last. "Well, well, well.’ 

As is true of most incipient bad things in life, I had not really prepared 
myself for this possibility. And what I felt, standing there, was not fear or 
remorse but only terrible, crushing humiliation, a dreadful, red-faced shame I 
hadn't felt since childhood. 

And what was even worse was to see Henry, and to realize that he was 
feeling the same thing, and if anything, more acutely than myself. I hated him 
— was so angry I wanted to kill him — but somehow I was not prepared to see 
him like that. 

Nobody said anything. Dust motes floated in a sunbeam. I thought of 
Camilla at the Albemarle, Charles in the hospital, Francis waiting trustfully in 
the car. 

‘Julian,’ said Henry, 'I can explain this.’ 

‘Please do,’ said Julian. 

His voice chilled me to the bone. Though he and Henry had in common a 
distinct coldness of manner — sometimes, around them, the very temperature 
seemed almost to drop —1 had always thought Henry's coldness essential, to 


the marrow, and Julian's only a veneer for what was, at bottom, a warm and 
kindhearted nature. But the twinkle in Julian's eye, as I looked at him now, 
was mechanical and dead. It was as if the charming theatrical curtain had 
dropped away and I saw him for the first time as he really was: not the benign 
old sage, the indulgent and protective good-parent of my dreams, but 
ambiguous, a moral neutral, whose beguiling trappings concealed a being 
watchful, capricious, and heartless. 

Henry started to talk. It was so painful to hear him — Henry! 

— stumble over his words that I am afraid I blocked out much of what he 
said. He began, in typical fashion, by attempting to justify himself but that 
soon faltered in the white glare of Julian's silence. Then — I still shudder to 
remember it — a desperate, pleading note crept into his voice. 'I disliked 
having to lie, of course’ — disliked! as if he were talking about an ugly necktie, 
a dull dinner party! — 'we never wanted to lie to you, but it was necessary. 
That is, I felt it was necessary. The first matter was an accident; there was no 
use in worrying you about it, was there? 

And then, with Bunny... He wasn't a happy person in those last months. I'm 
sure you know that. He was having a lot of personal problems, problems with 
his family...’ 

He went on and on. Julian's silence was vast, arctic. A black buzzing noise 
echoed in my head. ,' can't stand this, I thought, I've got to leave, but still 
Henry talked, and still I stood there, and the sicker and blacker I felt to hear 
Henry's voice and to see the look on Julian's face. 

Unable to stand it, I finally turned to go. Julian saw me do it. 

Abruptly, he cut Henry off. "That's enough,’ he said. 

There was an awful pause. I stared at him. This is it, I thought, with a kind of 
fascinated horror. He won't listen anymore. He doesn't want to be left alone 
with him. 

Julian reached into his pocket. The expression on his face was impossible to 
read. He took the letter out and handed it to Henry. 

'I think you'd better keep this,’ he said. 

He didn't get up from the table. The two of us left his office without a word. 
Funny, when I think about it now. That was the last time I ever saw him. 

Henry and I didn't speak in the hallway. Slowly, we drifted out, eyes averted, 
like strangers. As I went down the stairs he was standing by the windowsill on 
the landing, looking out, blind and unseeing. 

Francis was panic-stricken when he saw the look on my face. 

‘Oh, no,' he said. 'Oh, my God. What's happened?’ 

It was a long time before I could say anything. ‘Julian saw it,' 

I said. 

"What?' 

"He saw the letterhead. Henry's got it now.’ 

"How'd he get it?’ 

‘Julian gave it to him.' 


Francis was jubilant. 'He gave it to him? He gave Henry the letter?’ 

"Yes. 

‘And he's not going to tell anyone?’ 

'No, I don't think so.' 

He was startled by the gloom in my voice. 

"But what's the matter?’ he said shrilly. "You got it, didn't you? 

It's okay. Everything's all right now. Isn't it?’ 

I was staring out the car window, at the window of Julian's office. 

‘No,’ I said, 'no, I don't really think that it is.’ 

Years ago, in an old notebook, I wrote: 'One of Julian's most attractive 
qualities is his inability to see anyone, or anything, in its true light.’ And under 
it, in a different ink, 'maybe one of my most attractive qualities, as well (?)' 

It has always been hard for me to talk about Julian without romanticizing 
him. In many ways, I loved him the most of all; I and it is with him that i am 
most tempted to embroider, to .^ flatter, to basically reinvent. I think that is 
because Julian himself « 

« was constantly in the process of reinventing the people and events around 
him, conferring kindness, or wisdom, or bravery, or charm, on actions which 
contained nothing of the sort. It was one of the reasons I loved him: for that 
flattering light in which he saw me, for the person I was when I was with him, 
for what it was he allowed me to be. 

Now, of course, it would be easy for me to veer to the opposite extreme. I 
could say that the secret of Julian's charm was that he latched on to young 
people who wanted to feel better than everybody else; that he had a strange 
gift for twisting feelings of inferiority into superiority and arrogance. I could 
also say that he did this not through altruistic motives but selfish ones, in 
order to fulfill some egotistic impulse of his own. And I could elaborate on 
this at some length and with, I believe, a fair degree of accuracy. But still that 
would not explain the fundamental magic of his personality or why — even in 
the light of subsequent events — I still have an overwhelming wish to see him 
the way that I first saw him: as the wise old man who appeared to me out of 
nowhere on a desolate strip of road, with a bewitching offer to make all my 
dreams come true. 

But even in fairy tales, these kindly old gentlemen with their fascinating 
offers are not always what they seem to be. That should not be a particularly 
difficult truth for me to accept at this point but for some reason it is. More 
than anything I wish I could say that Julian's face crumbled when he heard 
what we had done. 

I wish I could say that he put his head on the table and wept, wept for 
Bunny, wept for us, wept for the wrong turns and the life wasted: wept for 
himself, for being so blind, for having over and over again refused to see. 

And the thing is, I had a strong temptation to say he had done these things 
anyway, though it wasn't at all the truth. 

George Orwell — a keen observer of what lay behind the glitter of 


constructed facades, social and otherwise — had met Julian on several 
occasions, and had not liked him. To a friend he wrote: 'Upon meeting Julian 
Morrow, one has the impression that he is a man of extraordinary sympathy 
and warmth. But what you call his «Asiatic serenity» is, I think, a mask for 
great coldness. The face one shows him he invariably reflects back at one, 
creating the illusion of warmth and depth when in fact he is brittle and 
shallow as a mirror. Acton' — this, apparently, Harold Acton, who was also in 
Paris then and a friend to both Orwell and Julian ‘disagrees. 

But I think he is not a man to be trusted.’ 

I have thought a great deal about this passage, also about a particularly 
shrewd remark once made by, of all people, Bunny. 

"Y'know,' he said, ‘Julian is like one of those people that'll pick all his 
favorite chocolates out of the box and leave the rest.' This seems rather 
enigmatic on the face of it, but actually I cannot think of a better metaphor for 
Julian's personality. It is similar to another remark made to me once by 
Georges Laforgue, on an occasion when I had been extolling Julian to the 
skies. ‘Julian,’ he said curtly, 'will never be a scholar of the very first rate, and 
that is because he is only capable of seeing things on a selective basis. 

When I disagreed — strenuously — and asked what was wrong with focusing 
one's entire attention on only two things, if those two things were Art and 
Beauty, Laforgue replied: 'There is nothing wrong with the love of Beauty. 
But Beauty — unless she is wed to something more meaningful — is always 
superficial. It is not that your Julian chooses solely to concentrate on certain, 
exalted things; it is that he chooses to ignore others equally as important.’ 

It's funny. In retelling these events, I have fought against a tendency to 
sentimentalize Julian, to make him seem very saintly — basically to falsify him 
— in order to make our veneration of him seem more explicable; to make it 
seem something more, in short, than my own fatal tendency to try to make 
interesting people good. And I know I said earlier that he was perfect but he 
wasn't perfect, far from it; he could be silly and vain and remote and often 
cruel and still we loved him, in spite of, because. 

Charles was released from the hospital the following day. Despite Francis's 
insistence that he come to his house for a while, he insisted on going home to 
his own apartment. His cheeks were sunken; he'd lost a lot of weight and he 
needed a haircut. He was sullen and depressed. We didn't tell him what had 
happened. 

I felt sorry for Francis. I could tell he was worried about Charles, and upset 
that he was so hostile and uncommunicative. 

"Would you like some lunch?’ he asked him. 

'No.' 

‘Come on. Let's go to the Brasserie.’ 

Tm not hungry.’ 

Tt'll be good. I'll buy you one of those roulage things you like for dessert.' 

We went to the Brasserie. It was eleven o'clock in the morning. 


By an unfortunate coincidence, the waiter sat us at the table by the window 
where Francis and I had sat with Julian less than twenty-four hours before. 
Charles wouldn't look at a menu. He ordered two Bloody Marys and drank 
them in quick succession. 

Then he ordered a third. 

Francis and I put down our forks and exchanged an uneasy glance. 

‘Charles,’ Francis said, 'why don't you get an omelet or something?’ 

'I told you I'm not hungry.’ 

Francis picked up a menu and gave it a quick once-over. Then he motioned 
to the waiter. 

'I said I'm not fucking hungry,’ said Charles without looking up. 

He was having a hard time keeping his cigarette balanced between his first 
and middle fingers. 

Nobody had much to say after that. We finished eating and got the check, not 
before Charles had time to finish his third Bloody Mary and order a fourth. 
We had to help him to the car. 

I was not much looking forward to going to Greek class, but when Monday 
rolled around I got up and went anyway. Henry and Camilla arrived 
separately — in case Charles decided to show up, I think — which, thank God, 
he didn't. Henry, I noticed, was puffy and very pale. He stared out the window 
and ignored Francis and me. 

Camilla was nervous — embarrassed, maybe, by the way Henry was acting. 
She was anxious to hear about Charles and asked a number of questions, to 
most of which she didn't receive any response at all. Soon it was ten after; 
then fifteen. 

Tve never known Julian to be this late,’ said Camilla, looking at her watch. 

Suddenly, Henry cleared his throat. His voice was strange and rusty, as if 
fallen into disuse. "He's not coming,’ he said. 

We turned to look at him. 

"What?’ said Francis. 

'I don't think he's going to come today.’ 

Just then we heard footsteps, and a knock at the door. It wasn't Julian, but the 
Dean of Studies. He creaked open the door and looked inside. 

"Well, well,’ he said. He was a sly, balding man in his early fifties who had a 
reputation for being kind of a smart-aleck. 'So this is what the Inner Sanctum 
looks like. The Holy of Holies. 

I've never once been allowed up here.’ 

We looked at him. 

"Not bad,' he said ruminatively. 'I remember about fifteen years ago, before 
they built the new Science Building, they had to stick some of the counselors 
up here. This one psychologist liked to leave her door open, thought it gave 
things a friendly feeling. «Good morning,» she'd say to Julian whenever he 
walked past her door, «have a nice day.» Can you believe that Julian phoned 
Charming Williams, my wicked predecessor, and threat ened to quit unless 


she was moved?» He chuckled.’ «That dreadful woman.» That's what he 
called her. «I can't bear that dreadful woman accosting me every time I 
happen to walk by." 

This was a story which had some currency around Hampden, and the Dean 
had left some of it out. The psychologist had not only left her own door open 
but also had tried to get Julian to do the same. 

'To tell the truth,’ said the Dean, 'I'd expected something a little more 
classical. Oil lamps. Discus throwing. Nude youths wrestling on the floor.' 

"What do you want?’ said Camilla, not very politely. 

He paused, caught short, and gave her an oily smile. 'We need to have a little 
talk,' he said. 'My office has just learned that Julian has been called away from 
school very suddenly. He has taken an indefinite leave of absence and does 
not know when he might return. Needless to say' — a phrase he delivered with 
sarcastic delicacy — 'this puts you all in a rather interesting position in terms of 
academics, especially as it is only three weeks until the end of term. I 
understand that he was not in the habit of giving a written examination?’ 

We stared at him. 

‘Did you write papers? Sing songs? How was he accustomed to determining 
your final grade?’ 

‘An oral examination for the tutorials,’ Camilla said, 'as well as a term paper 
for the Civilization class.’ She was the only one of us who was collected 
enough to speak. 'For the composition classes, an extended translation, 
English to Greek, from a passage of his choosing. 

The Dean pretended to ponder this. Then he took a breath and said: "The 
problem you face, as I'm sure you're aware, is that we currently have no other 
teacher able to take over your class. 

Mr Delgado has a reading knowledge of Greek, and though he says he'd be 
happy to look at your written work he is teaching a full load this term. Julian 
himself was most unhelpful on this point. I asked him to suggest a possible 
replacement and he said there wasn't any that he knew of.’ 

He took a piece of paper from his pocket. 'Now here are the three possible 
alternatives which occur to me. The first is for you to take incompletes and 
finish the course work in the fall. The thing is, however, I'm far from certain 
that Literature and Languages will be hiring another Classics teacher. There is 
so little interest in the subject, and the general consensus seems to be that it 
should be phased out, especially now that we're attempting to get the new 
Semiotics department off the ground.’ 

He took a deep breath. 'The second alternative is for you to take incompletes 
and finish the work in summer school. The third possibility is that we bring in 
— mind you, on a temporary basis a substitute teacher. Understand this. At this 
point in time it is extremely doubtful that we will continue to offer the degree 
in Classics at Hampden. For those of you who choose to remain with us, I feel 
sure that the English department can absorb you with minimal loss of credit 
hours, though I think each of you in order to fulfill the department 


requirements are looking at two semesters of work above and beyond what 
you might've anticipated for graduation. At any rate.' He looked at his list. 'I 
am sure you have heard of Hackett, the preparatory school for boys,’ he said. 
"Hack ett has extensive offerings in the field of Classics. I contacted the 
headmaster this morning and he said he would be happy to send a master over 
twice a week to supervise you. Though this might seem the best option from 
your perspective, it would by no means be ideal, relying, as it does, upon the 
auspices of the ' 

It was at this moment that Charles chose to come crashing through the door. 

He lurched in, looked around. Though he might not have been intoxicated 
technically, that very instant, he had been so recently enough for this to be an 
academic point. His shirttails hung out. His hair fell in long dirty strings over 
his eyes. 

"What?' he said, after a moment. 'Where's Julian?’ 

‘Don't you knock?’ said the Dean. 

Charles turned, unsteadily, and looked at him. 

"What's this?' he said. 'Who the hell are you?’ 

'T,' said the Dean sweetly, 'am the Dean of Studies." 

"What have you done with Julian?’ 

"He has left you. And somewhat in the lurch if I dare say it. 

He has been called very suddenly from the country and doesn't know — or 
hasn't thought — about his return. He gave me to understand that it was 
something with the State Department, the Isrami government and all that. I 
think we are fortunate not to have had more problems of this nature, with the 
princess having gone to school here. One thinks at the time only of the 
prestige of such a pupil, alas, and not for an instant of the possible 
repercussions. Though I can't for the life of me imagine what the Isramis 
would want with Julian. Hampden's own Salman Rushdie.’ He chuckled 
appreciatively, then consulted his sheet again. 'At any rate. I have arranged for 
the master from Hackett to meet with you tomorrow, here, at three p. m. I 
hope there is no conflict of schedule for anyone. If that happens to be the case, 
however, it would be well for you to re-evaluate your priorities, as this is the 
only time that he will be available to answer your I knew that Camilla hadn't 
seen Charles in well over a week, and I knew she couldn't have been prepared 
to see him looking so bad, but she was gazing at him with an expression not 
so much of surprise as of panic, and horror. Even Henry looked taken aback. 

",.. and, of course, this will entail a certain spirit of compromise on your 
parts too, as ' 

"What?' said Charles, interrupting him. 'What did you say? 

You said Julian's gone?’ 

'I must compliment you, young man, on your grasp of the English language. 

"What happened? He just picked up and left?’ 

In essence, yes. 

There was a brief pause. Then Charles said, in a loud, clear voice: 'Henry, 


why do I think for some reason that this is all your fault?’ 

There followed a long and not too pleasant silence. Then Charles spun and 
stormed out, slamming the door behind him. 

The Dean cleared his throat. 

‘As I was saying,’ he continued. 

It is strange, but true, to relate, that at this point in time I was still capable of 
being upset by the fact that my career at Hampden had pretty much gone 
down the drain. When the Dean had said 'two extra semesters,’ my blood ran 
cold. I knew, with the certainty I knew that night follows day, there was no 
way I could get my parents to make their measly, but quite necessary, 
contribution for an extra year. I'd lost time already, in three changes of major, 
in the transfer from California, and I'd lose even more if I transferred again — 
assuming that I could even get into another school, that I could get another 
scholarship, with my spotty records, with my spotty grades: why, I asked 
myself, oh, why, had I been so foolish, why hadn't I picked something and 
stuck with it, how was it that I could currently be at the end of my third year 
of college and have basically nothing to show for it? 

What made me angrier was that none of the others seemed to care. To them, 
I knew, this didn't make the slightest bit of difference. What was it to them if 
they had to go an extra term? 

What did it matter, if they failed to graduate, if they had to go back home? 
At least they had homes to go to. They had trust funds, allowances, dividend 
checks, doting grandmas, well connected uncles, loving families. College for 
them was only a way station, a sort of youthful diversion. But this was my 
main chance, the only one. And I had blown it. 

I spent a frantic couple of hours pacing in my room — that is, I'd come to 
think of it as 'mine' but it wasn't really, I had to be out in three weeks, already 
it seemed to be assuming a heartless air of impersonality — and drafting a 
memo to the financial aid office. The only way I could finish my degree — in 
essence, the only way I could ever acquire the means to support myself in any 
passably tolerable fashion — was if Hampden agreed to shoulder the entire cost 
of my education during this additional year. I pointed out, somewhat 
aggressively, that it wasn't my fault Julian had decided to leave. I brought up 
every miserable commendation and award I'd won since the eighth grade. I 
argued that a year of classics could only bolster and enrich this now highly 
desirable course of study in English Literature. 

Finally, my plea finished, and my handwriting a passionate scrawl, I fell 
down on my bed and went to sleep. At eleven o'clock I woke, made some 
changes, and headed for the all-night study room to type it up. On the way I 
stopped at the post office, where, to my immense gratification, a note in my 
box informed me that I had got the job apartment-sitting in Brooklyn, and that 
the professor wanted to meet with me sometime in the coming week to 
discuss my schedule. 

Well, that's the summer taken care of, I thought. 


It was a beautiful night, full moon, the meadow like silver and the 
housefronts throwing square black shadows sharp as cutouts on the grass. 
Most of the windows were dark: everyone sleeping, early to bed. I hurried 
across the lawn to the library, where the lights of the all-night study room — 
The House of Eternal Learning,’ Bunny had called it in happier days — burned 
clear and bright on the top floor, shining yellow through the treetops. I went 
up the outside stairs — iron stairs, like a fire escape, like the steps in my 
nightmare — my shoes clattering on the metal in a way that might have given 
me the heebie-jeebies in a less distracted mood. 

Then, through the window, I saw a dark figure in a black suit, alone. It was 
Henry. Books were piled in front of him but he wasn't working. For some 
reason, 1 thought of that February night I had seen him standing in the 
shadows beneath the windows of Dr Roland's office, dark and solitary, hands 
in the pockets of his overcoat and the snow whirling high in the empty arc of 
the streetlights. 

I closed the door. 'Henry,' I said. 'Henry. It's me.' 

He didn't turn his head. 'I just got back from Julian's house,’ he said, in a 
monotone. 

I sat down. 'And?' 

'The place is shut up. He's gone.’ 

There was a long silence. 

'I find it very hard to believe he's done this, you know.’ The light glinted off 
his spectacles; beneath the dark, glossy hair his face was deadly pale. 'It's just 
such a cowardly thing to have done. That's why he left, you know. Because he 
was afraid.’ 

The screens were open. A damp wind rustled in the trees. 

Beyond them clouds sailed over the moon, fast and wild. 

Henry took off his glasses. I never could get used to seeing him without 
them, that naked, vulnerable look he always had. 

"He's a coward,' he said. 'In our circumstance, he would have done exactly 
what we did. He's just too much of a hypocrite to admit it.’ 

I didn't say anything. 

"He doesn't even care that Bunny is dead. I could forgive him if that was why 
he felt this way, but it isn't. He wouldn't care if we'd killed half a dozen 
people. All that matters to him is keeping his own name out of it. Which is 
essentially what he said when I talked to him last night. 

"You went to see him?’ 

"Yes. One would hope that this matter would've seemed something more to 
him than just a question of his own comfort. 

Even to have turned us in would have shown some strength of character, not 
that I wanted to be turned in. But it's nothing but cowardice. Running away 
like this.’ 

Even after all that had happened, the bitterness and disappointment in his 
voice cut me to the heart. 


Henry,’ I said. I wanted to say something profound, that Julian was only 
human, that he was old, that flesh and blood are frail and weak and that there 
comes a time when we have to transcend our teachers. But I found myself 
unable to say anything at all. 

He turned his blind, unseeing eyes upon me. 

IT loved him more than my own father,’ he said .1 loved him more than 
anyone in the world.’ 

The wind was up. A gentle pitter of rain swept across the roof. 

We sat there like that, not talking, for a very long time. 

The next afternoon at three, I went to meet the new teacher. 

When I stepped inside Julian's office I was shocked. It was completely 
empty. The books, the rugs, the big round table were gone. All that was left 
were the curtains on the windows and a tacked-up Japanese print that Bunny 
had given him. Camilla was there, and Francis, looking pretty uncomfortable, 
and Henry. He was standing by the window doing his best to ignore the 
stranger. 

The teacher had dragged in some chairs from the dining hall. He was a 
round-faced, fair-haired man of about thirty, in turtleneck and jeans. A 
wedding band shone conspicuously on one pink hand; he had a conspicuous 
smell of after-shave. 'Welcome,' he said, leaning to shake my hand, and in his 
voice I heard the enthusiasm and condescension of a man accustomed to 
working with adolescents. 'My name is Dick Spence. Yours?’ 

It was a nightmarish hour. I really don't have the heart to go into it: his 
patronizing tone at the start (handing out a page from the New Testament, 
saying, 'Of course I don't expect you to pick up the finer points, if you can get 
the sense, it's okay with me’), a tone which metamorphosed gradually into 
surprise (‘Well! 

Rather advanced, for undergraduates!') and defensiveness (‘It's been quite a 
while since I've seen students at your level’) and, ultimately, embarrassment. 
He was the chaplain at Hackett and his Greek, which he had mostly learned at 
seminary, was crude and inferior even by my standards. He was one of those 
language teachers who rely heavily on mnemonics. (‘Agathon. Do you know 
how I remember that word? «Agatha Christie writes good mysteries.'») 
Henry's look of contempt was indescribable. The rest of us were silent and 
humiliated. Matters were not helped by Charles stumbling in — obviously 
drunk — about twenty minutes into the class. His appearance prompted a 
rehash of previous formalities (Welcome! My name is Dick Spence. 

Yours?') and even, incredibly, a repetition of the agathon embarrassment. 

When the lesson was over (teacher sneaking a look at his watch: "Well! 
Looks like we're running out of time here!') the five of us filed out in grim 
silence. 

"Well, it's only two more weeks,’ said Francis, when we were outside. 

Henry lit a cigarette. 'I'm not going back,’ he said. 

"Yeah,' Charles said sarcastically. That's right. That'll show him.’ 


‘But Henry,’ said Francis, 'you've got to go.’ 

He was smoking the cigarette with tight-lipped, resolute drags. 

'No, I don't,’ he said. 

"Two weeks. That's it.' 

‘Poor fellow,’ said Camilla. "He's doing the best he can.' 

‘But that's not good enough for him,' said Charles loudly. 

"Who does he expect? Fucking Richmond Lattimore?’ 

"Henry, if you don't go you'll fail,’ said Francis. 

'I don't care. 

"He doesn't have to go to school,’ said Charles. 'He can do whatever he 
fucking pleases. He can fail every single fucking class and his dad'll still send 
him that fat allowance check every month ' 

‘Don't say «fuck» anymore,' said Henry, in a quiet but ominous voice. 

"Fuck? What's the matter, Henry? You never heard that word 1 before? Isn't 
that what you do to my sister every night?’ 

I remember, when I was a kid, once seeing my father strike my mother for 
absolutely no reason. Though he sometimes did the same thing to me, I did 
not realize that he did it sheerly out of bad temper, and believed that his 
trumped-up justifications (‘You talk too much’; 'Don't look at me like that’) 
somehow warranted the punishment. But the day I saw him hit my mother 
(because she had remarked, innocently, that the neighbors were building an 
addition to their house; later, he would claim she had ,| provoked him, that it 
was a reproach about his abilities as wage earner, and she, tearfully, would 
agree) I realized that the childish impression I had always had of my father, as 
Just Lawgiver, was entirely wrong. We were utterly dependent on this man, 
who was not only deluded and ignorant, but incompetent in every way. What 
was more, I knew that my mother was incapable of standing up to him. It was 
like walking into the cockpit of an airplane and finding the pilot and co-pilot 
passed out drunk in their seats. And standing outside the Lyceum, I was struck 
with a black, incredulous horror, which in fact was not at all unlike the horror 
I had felt at twelve, sitting on a bar stool in our sunny little kitchen in Piano. 
Who is in control here? I thought, dismayed. Who is flying this plane? 

And the thing of it was, that Charles and Henry had to appear together in 
court in less than a week, because of the business with Henry's car. 

Camilla, I knew, was worried sick. She — whom I had never known to fear 
anything — was afraid now; and though in a certain perverse way I was 
pleased at her distress, there was no denying that if Henry and Charles — who 
practically came to blows each time they were in the same room — were going 
to be forced to appear before a judge, and with some show of cooperation and 
friendship, there could be no possible outcome but disaster. 

Henry had hired a lawyer in town. The hope that a third party would be able 
to reconcile these differences had granted Camilla a small measure of 
optimism, but in the afternoon on the day of the appointment, I received a 
telephone call from her. 


‘Richard,’ she said. 'I've got to talk to you and Francis.’ 

Her tone frightened me. When I arrived at Francis's apartment, I found 
Francis badly shaken and Camilla in tears. 

I had seen her cry only once before, and then only, I think, from nerves and 
exhaustion. But this was different. She was blank and hollow-eyed, and there 
was despair in the set of her features. 

‘Camilla,' I said. "What's wrong?’ 

She didn't answer immediately. She smoked one cigarette, then another. 
Little by little the story came out. Henry and Charles had gone to see the 
lawyer and Camilla, in capacity of peacemaker, had gone along. At first, it 
had seemed as if everything might be all right. Henry, apparently, had not 
hired the lawyer entirely from altruism but because the judge before whom 
they were to appear had a reputation for being tough on drunk drivers and 
there was a possibility — as Charles neither had a valid driver's license nor was 
covered on Henry's insurance — that Henry might lose his license or car or 
both. Charles, though he obviously felt himself martyred by the whole 
business, had nonetheless been willing to go along: not, as he told anyone 
who would listen, because he had any affection for Henry but because he was 
sick of being blamed for things that weren't his fault, and if Henry lost his 
license he'd never hear the end of it. 

But the meeting was a catastrophe. Charles, in the office, was sullen and 
uncommunicative. This was merely embarrassing but then — being prodded a 
bit too energetically by the attorney — he suddenly and quite without warning 
lost his head. 'You should have heard him,’ said Camilla. 'He told Henry he 
didn't care if he lost his car. He told him he didn't care if the judge put them 
both in jail for fifty years. And Henry — well, you can imagine how Henry 
reacted. He blew up. The lawyer thought they were out of their minds. He 
kept trying to get Charles to calm down, be reasonable. And Charles said: «I 
don't care what happens to him. I don't care if he dies. I wish he was dead." 

It got so bad, she said, the lawyer kicked them out of his office. 

Doors were opening up and down the hallway: an insurance agent, the tax 
assessor, a dentist in a white coat, all poking their heads out to see what the 
fuss was about. Charles stormed off walked home, got a taxi, she didn't know 
what he'd done. 

"And Henry?’ 

She shook her head. 'He was in a rage,’ she said; her voice was exhausted, 
hopeless. 'As I was following him to the car, the lawyer pulled me aside. 
«Look here,» he said. «I don't know what the situation is, but your brother is 
obviously quite disturbed. Please try to make him understand that if he doesn't 
cool down, he's going to be in a lot more trouble than he bargained for. This 
judge is not going to be particularly amenable to them even if they walk in 
there like a pair of lambs. Your brother is almost sure to be sentenced to an 
alcohol treatment program, which might not be a bad idea from what I've seen 
of him today. There's a pretty good chance that the judge will give him 


probation, which is not as easy as it sounds. And there's more than a gambler's 
chance that he's going to get either jail time or he's going to get put in a locked 
ward over at the detox center in Manchester." 

She was extremely upset. Francis was ashen-faced. 

"What does Henry say?’ I asked her. 

"He says he doesn't care about the car,’ she said. 'He doesn't care about 
anything. «Let him go to jail,» he says.’ 

"You saw this judge?’ Francis said to me. 

"Yes. 

"What was he like?’ 

'To tell you the truth, he looked like a pretty tough customer,' 

I said. 

Francis lit a cigarette. 'What would happen,’ he said, 'if Charles didn't show 
up?’ 

Tm not sure. I'm almost certain they'd come looking for him. 

"But if they couldn't find him?' 

"What are you suggesting?’ I said. 

'I think we ought to get Charles out of town for a while,’ said Francis. He 
looked tense and worried. ‘School's almost over. It's not as if anything's 
keeping him here. I think we ought to pack him off to my mother and Chris in 
New York for a couple of weeks.’ 

"The way he's acting now?’ 

‘Drunk, you mean? You think my mother minds drunks? He'd be safe as a 
baby.’ 

'I don't think,’ said Camilla, 'you'd be able to get him to go.' 

T could take him myself, said Francis. 

‘But what if he got away?' I pointed out. 'Vermont is one thing but he could 
get into a hell of a lot of trouble in New York.’ 

‘All right,’ said Francis irritably, ‘all right, it was just an idea.’ 

He ran a hand through his hair. 'You know what we could do? 

We could take him out to the country.’ 

"To your place, you mean?’ 

"Yes. 

"What would that accomplish?’ 

"Easy to get him there, for one thing. And once he's out there, what's he 
going to do? He won't have a car. It's miles from the road. You can't get a 
Hampden taxi driver to pick you up for love nor money.’ 

Camilla was looking at him thoughtfully. 

‘Charles loves to go to the country,’ she said. 

'I know,’ said Francis, pleased. 'What could be simpler? And we won't have 
to keep him there long. Richard and I can stay with him. I'll buy a case of 
champagne. We'll make it look like a party.’ 

It was not easy to get Charles to come to the door. We knocked for what 
seemed like half an hour. Camilla had given us a key, which we didn't want to 


use unless we had to, but just as we were contemplating it the bolt snapped 
and Charles squinted at us through the crack. 

He looked disordered, terrible. 'What do you want?’ he said. 

‘Nothing,’ said Francis, quite easily, despite a slight, stunned pause of maybe 
a second. 'Can we come in?’ 

Charles looked back and forth at the two of us. 'Is anybody with you?’ 

'No,' Francis said. 

He opened the door and let us in. The shades were pulled and the place had 
the sour smell of garbage. As my eyes adjusted to the dim I saw dirty dishes, 
apple cores and soup cans littering almost every conceivable surface. Beside 
the refrigerator, arranged with perverse neatness, stood a row of empty Scotch 
bottles. 

A lithe shadow darted across the kitchen counter, twisting through the dirty 
pans and empty milk cartons: Jesus, I thought, is that a rat? But then it jumped 
to the floor, tail switching, and I saw it was a cat. Its eyes glowed at us in the 
dark. 

‘Found her in an empty lot,’ said Charles. His breath, I noticed, did not have 
an alcoholic odor but a suspiciously minty one. 

‘She's not too tame.’ He pushed up the sleeve of his bathrobe and showed us 
a discolored, contaminated-looking crisscross of scratches on his forearm. 

‘Charles,’ said Francis, jingling his car keys nervously, 'we stopped by 
because we're driving out to the country. Thought it might be nice to get away 
for a while. Do you want to come?’ 

Charles's eyes narrowed. He pushed down his sleeve. 'Did Henry send you?’ 
he said. 

'God, no,’ said Francis, surprised. 

‘Are you sure?’ 

'I haven't seen him in days. 

Charles still didn t look convinced. 

"We're not even speaking to him,’ I said. 

Charles turned to look at me. His gaze was watery and a little unfocused. 
‘Richard,’ he said. 'Hi.' 

'Hi.' 

'You know,' he said, T've always liked you a lot.' 

'I like you, too.' 

'You wouldn't go behind my back, would you?' 

‘Of course not.' 

‘Because,’ he said, nodding at Francis, 'because I know he would.' 

Francis opened his mouth, then shut it. He looked as if he'd been slapped. 

"You underestimate Francis,’ I said to Charles, in a calm, quiet voice. It was a 
mistake the others often made with him, to try to reason with him in a 
methodical, aggressive way, when all he wanted was to be reassured like a 
child. 'Francis likes you very much. He's your friend. So am I.' 

"Are you?’ he said. 


‘Of course. 

He pulled out a kitchen chair and sat down, heavily. The cat slunk over and 
began to twine round his ankles. 'I'm afraid,’ he said hoarsely. 'I'm afraid 
Henry's going to kill me. 

Francis and I looked at each other. 

'Why?' said Francis. 'Why would he want to do that?’ 

"Because I'm in the way.’ He looked up at us. 'He'd do it, too, you know,’ he 
said. 'For two cents.' He nodded at a small, unlabeled medicine bottle on the 
counter. 'You see that?’ he said. 

"Henry gave it to me. Couple of days ago.’ 

I picked it up. With a chill I recognized the Nembutals I'd stolen for Henry at 
the Corcorans'’. 

'I don't know what they are,’ said Charles, pushing the dirty hair from his 
eyes. 'He told me they'd help me sleep. God knows I need something, but I'm 
afraid to take them.’ 

I handed the bottle to Francis. He looked at it, then up at me, horrified. 

‘Capsules, too,’ said Charles. 'No telling what he rilled them with.’ 

But he wouldn't even have to, that was the evil thing. I remembered, with a 
sick feeling, having tried to impress upon Henry how dangerous these were 
when mixed with liquor. 

Charles passed a hand over his eyes. 'I've seen him sneaking around here at 
night,’ he said. 'Out back. I don't know what he's doing.’ 

'Henry?' 

"Yes. And if he tries anything with me,' he said, ‘it'll be the worst mistake he 
ever made in his life.’ 

We had less trouble enticing him to the car than I'd expected. 

He was in a rambling, paranoid humor and was somewhat jj comforted by 
our solicitude. He asked repeatedly if Henry knew where we were going. 'You 
haven't talked to him, have you?’ 

'No,' we assured him, 'no, of course not.’ 

He insisted on taking the cat with him. We had a terrible time catching it — 
Francis and I dodging round the dark kitchen, knocking dishes to the floor, 
trying to corner it behind the water heater while Charles stood anxiously by 
saying things like 'Come on’ and 'Good kitty.’ Finally, in desperation, I seized 
it by a scrawny black hindquarter — it thrashed around and sank its teeth into 
my arm — and, together, we managed to wrap it up in a dish towel so that only 
its head stuck out, eyes bulging and ears flattened back against the skull. We 
gave the mummified, hissing bundle to Charles. 'Now, hold her tight,’ Francis 
kept saying in the car, glancing anxiously back in the rear-view mirror, 'watch 
out, don't let it get away ' 

But, of course, it did get away, catapulting into the front seat and nearly 
running Francis off the road. Then, after scrabbling around under the brake 
and gas pedal — Francis aghast, attempting simultaneously to avoid touching it 
and to kick it away from him — it settled on the floorboard by my feet, 


succumbing to an attack of diarrhea before falling into a glaring, prickle- 
haired trance. 

I had not been out to Francis's since the week before Bunny died. 

The trees in the drive were in full leaf and the yard was overgrown and dark. 
Bees droned in the lilacs. Mr Hatch, mowing the lawn some thirty yards away, 
nodded and raised a hand at us. 

The house was shadowy and cool. There were sheets on some of the 
furniture and dust balls on the hardwood floor. We locked the cat in an 
upstairs bathroom and Charles went down to the kitchen, to make himself 
something to eat, he said. He came back up with a jar of peanuts and a double 
martini in a water glass, which he carried into his room, and shut the door. 

We didn't see an awful lot of Charles for the next thirty-six hours or so. He 
stayed in his room eating peanuts, and drinking, and looking out the window 
like the old pirate in Treasure Island. Once he came down to the library while 
Francis and I were playing cards, but he refused our invitation to join in and 
poked listlessly through the shelves, finally meandering upstairs without 
choosing a book. He came down for coffee in the mornings, in an old bathrobe 
of Francis's, and sat in the kitchen windowsill looking moodily over the lawn 
as if he were waiting for someone. 

"When do you think is the last time he had a bath?’ Francis whispered to me. 

He had lost all interest in the cat. Francis sent Mr Hatch out for some cat 
food and each morning and evening Francis let himself in the bathroom to 
feed it (‘Get away, I heard him muttering, 'get away from me, you devil,') and 
came out again with a fouled crumple of newspaper, which he held from his 
body at arm's length. 

About six o'clock in the afternoon of our third day there, Francis was up in 
the attic digging around for ajar of old coins his aunt had said he could have if 
he could find it, and I was lying on the couch downstairs drinking iced tea and 
trying to memorize the irregular subjunctive verbs in French (for my final 
exam was in less than a week) when I heard the phone ringing in the kitchen. 

I went to answer it. 

It was Henry. 'So there you are,’ he said. 

"Yes. 

There was a long, crackly silence. At last he said: 'May I speak to Francis?’ 

"He can't come to the phone,’ I said. "What is it?’ 

‘I suppose you've got Charles out there with you.’ 

"Look here, Henry,’ I said. "What's the big idea giving Charles those sleeping 
pills?’ 

His voice came back at me brisk and cool. 'I don't know what you're talking 
about.’ 

"Yes you do. I saw them.’ 

"Those pills you gave me, you mean?’ 

"Yes. 

"Well, if he has them, he must have taken them from my medicine cabinet." 


"He says you gave them to him,' I said. 'He thinks you're trying to poison 
him.' 

That's nonsense.' 

‘Is it?’ 

'He is there, isn't he?’ 

"Yes,' I said, 'we brought him out the day before yesterday...» and then I 
stopped, because it seemed to me that somewhere towards the beginning of 
this sentence I had heard a stealthy but distinct click, as of an extension being 
picked up. 

"Well, listen,’ Henry said. 'I'd appreciate it if you could keep him out there a 
day or two longer. Everyone seems to think this should be some big secret but 
believe me, I'm happy to have him out of the way for a while. If he doesn't 
come to court he'll be guilty by default, but I don't think there's an awful lot 
they can do to him.’ 

It seemed 1 could hear breathing on the other end. 

"What is it?’ said Henry, suddenly wary. 

Neither of us said anything for a moment. 

'Charles?' I said. 'Charles, is that you?’ 

Upstairs, the telephone slammed down. 

I went up and knocked on Charles's door. No answer. When I tried the knob, 
it was locked. 

‘Charles,’ I said. "Let me in.’ 

No answer. 

‘Charles, it wasn't anything,’ I said. 'He called out of the blue. 

All I did was answer the phone.’ 

Still no answer. I stood in the hall for a few minutes, the afternoon sun 
shining golden on the polished oak floor. 

"Really, Charles, I think you're being a bit silly. Henry can't hurt you. You're 
perfectly safe out here.’ 

‘Bullshit,’ came the muffled reply from within. 

There was nothing more to say. I went downstairs again, and back to the 
subjunctive verbs. 

I must have fallen asleep on the couch, and I don't know how much later it 
was — not a whole lot later, because it was still light out — when Francis shook 
me awake, not too gently. 

‘Richard,’ he said. 'Richard, you've got to wake up. Charles is gone. 

I sat up, rubbed my eyes. 'Gone?' I said. 'But where could he go?’ 

'I don't know. He's not in the house.' 

‘Are you sure?’ 

Tve looked everywhere.’ 

"He's got to be around somewhere. Maybe he's in the yard.’ 

'I can't find him.' 

"Maybe he's hiding.’ 

‘Get up and help me look.' 


I went upstairs. Francis ran outside. The screen door slammed behind him. 

Charles's room was in disarray and a half-empty bottle of Bombay gin — 
from the liquor cabinet in the library — was on the night table. None of his 
things were gone. 

I went through all the upstairs rooms, then up to the attic. 

Lampshades and picture frames, organdy party dresses yellowed with age. 
Gray wide-plank floors, so worn they —were almost fuzzy. A shaft of dusty 
cathedral light filtered through the stained glass porthole that faced the front 
of the house. 

I went down the back staircase — low and claustrophobic, scarcely three feet 
wide — through the kitchen and butler's pantry, and out onto the back porch. 
Some distance away, Francis and Mr Hatch were standing in the driveway. Mr 
Hatch was talking to Francis. I had never heard Mr Hatch say much of 
anything to anyone and he was plainly uncomfortable. He kept running a hand 
over his scalp. His manner was cringing and apologetic. i! 

I met Francis on his way back to the house. 

"Well,' he said, 'this is a hell of a note.’ He looked a bit stunned. 

"Mr Hatch says he gave Charles the keys to his truck about an hour and a half 
ago.' 

"What?' 

"He said Charles came looking for him and said he had to run an errand. He 
promised to have the truck back in fifteen minutes. 

We looked at each other. 

"Where do you think he went?’ I said. 

"How should I know?’ 

"Do you think he just took off?’ 

"Looks that way, doesn't it?’ 

We went back in the house — dim now with twilight — and sat by the window 
on a long davenport that had a sheet thrown over it. The warm air smelled like 
lilac. Across the lawn, we could hear Mr Hatch trying to get the lawn mower 
started up again. 

Francis had his arms folded across the back of the davenport and his chin 
resting on his arms. He was looking out the window. 

'I don't know what to do,' he said. 'He's stolen that truck, you know.’ 

"Maybe he'll be back.’ 

Tm afraid he'll have a wreck. Or a cop will pull him over. I'll bet you 
anything he's plastered. That's all he needs, getting stopped for drunk driving.' 

‘Shouldn't we go look for him?' 

'I wouldn't know where to start. He could be halfway to Boston for all we 
know,’ 'What else can we do? Sit around and wait for the phone to ring?’ 

First we tried the bars: the Farmer's Inn, the Villager, the Boulder Tap and 
the Notty Pine. The Notch. The Four Squires. The Man of Kent. It was a hazy, 
gorgeous summer twilight and the gravel parking lots were packed with trucks 
but none of the trucks was Mr Hatch's. 


Just for the hell of it, we drove by the State Liquor Store. The aisles were 
bright and empty, splashy rum displays (‘Tropical Island Sweepstakes!') 
competing with somber, medicinal rows of vodka and gin. A cardboard cutout 
advertising wine coolers twirled from the ceiling. There were no customers, 
and a fat old Vermonter with a naked woman tattooed on his forearm was 
leaning against the cash register, passing time with a kid who worked at the 
Mini-Mart next door. 

‘So then,' I heard him say in an undertone, 'so then the guy pulls out a sawed- 
off shotgun. Emmett's standing here beside me, right where I am now. «We 
don't have the key to the cashbox,» he says. And the guy pulls the trigger and 
I seen Emmett's brains' — he gestured — 'splatter all over that wall back there 
We drove to campus, to the library (‘He's not there,’ said Francis, Till bet a 
million dollars') and back to the bars again. 

‘He's left town,’ said Francis. 'I know it,’ 'Do you think Mr Hatch will call the 
police?’ 

"What would you do? If it was your truck? He won't do anything without 
talking to me, but if Charles isn't back, say, by tomorrow afternoon...» 

We decided to drive by the Albemarle. Henry's car was parked out front. 
Francis and I went in the lobby cautiously, not knowing quite how we were 
going to deal with the innkeeper, but, miraculously, there was no one at the 
desk. 

We went upstairs to 3-A. Camilla let us in. She and Henry were eating their 
dinner, from room service — lamb chops, bottle of burgundy, yellow rose in a 
bud vase. 

Henry was not pleased to see us. 'What can I do for you?’ he said, putting 
down his fork. 

‘It's Charles,’ said Francis. 'He's gone AWOL.’ 

He told them about the truck. I sat down beside Camilla. I was hungry and 
her lamb chops looked pretty good. She saw me looking at them and pushed 
the plate at me distractedly. 'Here, have some,’ she said. 

I did, and a glass of wine, too. Henry ate steadily as he listened. 

"Where do you think he's gone?’ he said when Francis had finished. 

"How the hell should I know?’ 

"You can keep Mr Hatch from pressing charges, can't you?’ 

"Not if he doesn't get the truck back. Or if Charles cracks it up. 

"How much could a truck like that possibly cost? Assuming your aunt didn't 
buy it for him in the first place. 

"That's beside the point.’ 

Henry wiped his mouth with a napkin and reached in his pocket for a 
cigarette. 'Charles is getting to be quite a problem,’ he said. 'You know what 
I've been thinking? I wonder how much it would cost to hire a private nurse.’ 

"To get him off drink, you mean?’ 

‘Of course. We can't send him to the hospital, obviously. 

Perhaps if we got a hotel room — not here, of course, but somewhere — and if 


we found some trustworthy person, maybe someone who didn't speak English 
all that well...» 

Camilla looked ill. She was slumped back in her chair. She said: 'Henry, 
what are you going to do? Kidnap him?’ 

‘Kidnap is not the word that I would use.’ 

Tm afraid he'll have a wreck. I think we ought to go look for him. 

"We've looked all over town,’ said Francis. 'I don't think he's in Hampden. 

"Have you called the hospital?’ 

'No.' 

"What I think we really ought to do,' said Henry, 'is call the police. Ask if 
there have been any traffic accidents. Do you think Mr Hatch will agree to say 
that he lent Charles the truck?’ 

"He did lend Charles the truck." 

In that case,’ said Henry, 'there should be no problem. Unless, of course, he 
gets stopped for drunk driving.’ 

‘Or unless we can't find him.' 

‘From my point of view,’ said Henry, 'the best thing that Charles could do 
right now is to disappear entirely from the face of the earth.’ 

Suddenly there was a loud, frenetic banging at the door. We looked at one 
other. 

Camilla's face had gone blank with relief. 'Charles,’ she said, 'Charles,' and 
she jumped up from her chair and started to the door; but no one had locked it 
behind us, and before she got there it flew open with a crash. 

It was Charles. He stood in the doorway, blinking drunkenly around the 
room, and I was so surprised and glad to see him that it was a moment before 
I realized that he had a gun. 

He stepped inside and kicked the door shut behind him. It was the little 
Beretta that Francis's aunt kept in the night table, the one we'd used for target 
practice the fall before. We stared at him, thunderstruck. 

At last Camilla said, and in a voice which was fairly steady: 'Charles, what 
do you think you are doing?’ 

‘Out of the way,’ said Charles. He was very drunk. 

‘So you've come to kill me?’ said Henry. He was still holding his cigarette. 
He was remarkably composed. 'Is that it?’ 

"Yes. 

‘And what do you suppose that will solve?’ 

"You've ruined my life, you son of a bitch.' He had the gun pointed at Henry's 
chest. With a sinking feeling, I remembered what an expert shot he was, how 
he'd broken the rows of mason jars one by one. 

‘Don't be an idiot,’ Henry snapped; and I felt the first prickle of real panic at 
the back of my neck. This belligerent, bullying tone might work with Francis, 
maybe even with me, but it was a disastrous tack to take with Charles. 'If 
anyone's to blame for your problems, it's you.' 

I wanted to tell him to shut up, but before I could say anything Charles 


lurched abruptly to the side, to clear his shot. 

Camilla stepped into his path. ‘Charles, give me the gun,' she said. 

He pushed the hair from his eyes with his forearm, holding the gun 
remarkably steady with his other hand. 'I'm telling you, Milly.’ It was a pet 
name he had for her, one he seldom used. 

"You better get out of the way.’ 

‘Charles,’ said Francis. He was white as a ghost. 'Sit down. 

Have some wine. Let's just forget about this.’ 

The window was open and the chirrup of the crickets washed in harsh and 
strong. 

"You bastard,’ said Charles, reeling backwards, and it was a moment before I 
realized, startled, that he was speaking not to Francis or Henry but to me. 'I 
trusted you. You told him where I was.’ 

I was too petrified to answer. I blinked at him. 

I knew where you were,’ said Henry coolly. 'If you want to shoot me, 
Charles, go ahead and do it. It'll be the stupidest thing you ever did in your 
life.’ 

"The stupidest thing I ever did in my life was listening to you,’ 

Charles said. 

What happened next took place in an instant. Charles raised his arm; and 
quick as a flash, Francis, who was standing closest to him, threw a glass of 
wine in his face. At the same time Henry sprang from his chair and rushed in. 
There were four pops in rapid succession, like a cap gun. With the second 
pop, I heard a windowpane shatter. And with the third I was conscious of a 
warm, stinging sensation in my abdomen, to the left of my navel. 

Henry was holding Charles's right forearm above his head with both hands, 
bending him backwards; Charles was struggling to get the gun with his left 
hand, but Henry twisted it from his wrist and it dropped to the carpet. Charles 
dove for it but Henry was too quick. 

I was still standing. I'm shot, I thought, I'm shot. I reached down and touched 
my stomach. Blood. There was a small hole, slightly charred, in my white 
shirt: my Paul Smith shin, 1 thought, with a pang of anguish. I'd paid a week's 
salary for it in San Francisco. My stomach felt very hot. Waves of heat 
radiating from the bull's-eye. 

Henry had the gun. He twisted Charles's arm behind his back — Charles 
fighting, thrashing wildly about — and, nosing the pistol into his spine, shoved 
him away from the door. 

I still hadn't quite grasped what had happened. Maybe I should sit down, I 
thought. Was the bullet still in me? Was I going to die? The thought was 
ridiculous; it didn't seem possible. My stomach burned but I felt oddly calm. 
Getting shot, I'd always thought, would hurt a lot more than this. Carefully, I 
stepped back, and felt the back of the chair I had been sitting in bump against 
my legs. I sat down. 

Charles, despite having one arm pinned behind him, was trying to elbow 


Henry in the stomach with the other. Henry pushed him, staggering, across the 
room and into a chair. 'Sit down,’ he said. 

Charles tried to get up. Henry mashed him back down. He tried to get up a 
second time and Henry slapped him across the face with his open hand with a 
whack that was louder than the gunshots. Then, with the pistol on him, he 
stepped to the windows and drew the shades. 

I put my hand over the hole in my shirt. Bending forward slightly, I felt a 
sharp pain. I expected everyone to stop and look at me. No one did. I 
wondered if I should call it to their attention. 

Charles's head was rolled against the back of the chair. I noticed that there 
was blood on his mouth. His eyes were glassy. 

Awkwardly — he was holding the gun in his good hand Henry reached up and 
took off his spectacles and rubbed them on the front of his shirt. Then he 
hooked them over his ears again. "Well, Charles,’ he said. 'You've done it 
now.’ 

I heard some kind of commotion downstairs, through the open window — 
footsteps, voices, a door slamming. 

‘Do you think anybody heard?’ said Francis anxiously. 

'I should think they did,’ Henry said. 

Camilla went over to Charles. Drunkenly, he made as if to push her away. 

‘Get away from him,' Henry said. 

"What are we going to do about this window?’ said Francis. 

"What are we going to do about me?’ I said. 

They all turned and looked at me. 

"He shot me. 

Somehow, this remark did not elicit the dramatic response I expected. Before 
I had the chance to elaborate, there were footsteps on the stairs and somebody 
banged at the door. 

"What's going on in there?’ I recognized the innkeeper's voice. 

"What's happening?’ 

Francis put his face in his hands. 'Oh, shit,’ he said. 

‘Open up in there.’ 

Charles, drunkenly, mumbled something and tried to raise his head. Henry 
bit his lip. He went to the window and looked out the corner of the shade. 

Then he turned around. He still had the pistol. ‘Come here,’ he said to 
Camilla. 

She looked at him in horror. So did Francis and I. 

He beckoned to her with his gun arm. 'Come here,’ he said. 

‘Quick.’ 

I felt faint. What's he doing? I thought, bewildered. 

Camilla took a step away from him. Her gaze was terrified. 

‘No, Henry,’ she said, ‘don't...’ 

To my surprise, he smiled at her. "You think I'd hurt you?’ he said. 'Come 
here.’ 


She went to him. He kissed her between the eyes, then whispered something 
— what, I've always wondered — in her ear. 

Tve got a key,’ the innkeeper yelled, pounding away at the door. Till use it.’ 

The room was swimming. Idiot, I thought wildly, just try the knob. 

Henry kissed Camilla again. 'I love you,’ he said. Then he said, out loud: 
‘Come in.’ 

The door flew open. Henry raised the arm with the gun. He's going to shoot 
them, I thought, dazed; the innkeeper and his wife, behind him, thought the 
same thing, because they froze about three steps into the room — but then I 
heard Camilla scream, 'No, Henry!’ and, too late, I realized what he was going 
to do. 

He put the pistol to his temple and fired, twice. Two flat cracks. They 
slammed his head to the left. It was the kick of the gun, I think, that triggered 
the second shot. 

His mouth fell open. A draft, created by the open door, sucked the curtains 
into the gap of the open window. For a moment or two, they shuddered 
against the screen. Then they breathed out again, with something like a sigh; 
and Henry, his eyes squeezed tight, and his knees giving way beneath him, 
fell with a thud to the carpet. 


Epilogue ^ 


Alas, poor gentleman, 
He look'd not like the ruins of his youth 
But like the ruins of those ruins. 

—John Ford, The Broken Heart 


I managed to get out of taking my French exams the next week, due to the 
very excellent excuse of having a gunshot wound to the stomach. 

They said at the hospital that I was lucky, and I suppose I was. 

The bullet drilled me clean through, missing my intestinal wall by a 
millimeter or two and my spleen by not much more, exiting about an inch and 
a half to the right of where it came in. I lay flat on my back in the ambulance, 
feeling the summer night flash by warm and mysterious — kids on bikes, 
moths haunting the street lamps — and wondering if this was what it was like, 
if life sped up when you were about to die. Bleeding richly. Sensations fading 
round the edges. I kept thinking how funny, this dark ride to the underworld, 
the tunnel illuminated by Shell Oil, Burger King. The paramedic riding in the 
back wasn't much older than I was; a kid, really, with bad skin and a downy 
little moustache. 

He had never seen a gunshot wound. He kept asking what it felt like? dull or 
sharp? an ache or burn? My head was spinning and naturally I could give him 
no kind of coherent answer but I remember thinking dimly that it was sort of 
like the first time I got drunk, or slept with a girl; not quite what one expected, 
really, but once it happened one realized it couldn't be any other way. Neon 
lights: Motel 6, Dairy Queen. Colors so bright, they nearly broke my heart. 

Henry died, of course. With two bullets to the head I don't suppose he could 
have done much else. Still, he lived more than twelve hours, a feat which 
amazed the doctors. (I was under sedation, this is what they tell me.) Such 
grave wounds, they said, would have killed most people instantly. I wonder if 
that means he didn't want to die; and if so, why he shot himself in the first 
place. As bad as it looked, there in the Albemarle, I still think we could have 
patched it up somehow. It wasn't from desperation that he did it. Nor, I think, 
was it fear. The business with Julian was heavy on his mind; it had impressed 
him deeply. 

I think he felt the need to make a noble gesture, something to prove to us and 
to himself that it was in fact possible to put those high cold principles which 
Julian had taught us to use. Duty, piety, loyalty, sacrifice. I remember his 
reflection in the mirror as he raised the pistol to his head. His expression was 
one of rapt concentration, of triumph, almost, a high diver rushing to the end 
of the board; eyes tight, joyous, waiting for the big splash. 

I think about it quite a bit, actually, that look on his face. I think about a lot 
of things. I think about the first time I ever saw a birch tree; about the last time 


I saw Julian; about the first sentence that I ever learned in Greek. Xa Xend id 
Kct Xd. Beauty is harsh. 

I did end up graduating from Hampden, with a degree in English literature. 
And I went to Brooklyn, with my guts taped up like a gangster ('Well!' said 
the professor, 'this is Brooklyn Heights, not Bensonhurst!') and spent the 
summer drowsing on his rooftop deck, smoking cigarettes, reading Proust, 
dreaming about death and indolence and beauty and time. The gunshot healed, 
leaving a char mark on my stomach. I went back to school in the fall: a dry, 
gorgeous September, you wouldn't believe how beautiful the trees were that 
year: clear skies, littered groves, people whispering whenever I walked by. 

Francis didn't come back to school that fall. Neither did the twins. The story 
at the Albemarle was simple, it told itself, really: suicidal Henry, struggle for 
the gun, leaving me wounded and him dead. In a way I felt this was unfair to 
Henry but in another it wasn't. And it made me feel better in some obscure 
way: imagining myself a hero, rushing fearlessly for the gun, instead of 
merely loitering in the bullet s path like the bystander which I so essentially 
am. 

Camilla took Charles down to Virginia the day of Henry's funeral. 

It was, incidentally, the same day that Henry and Charles were to have 
appeared in court. The funeral took place in St. Louis. 

None of us was there but Francis. I was still in the hospital, half-delirious, 
still seeing the overturned wine glass rolling on the carpet and the oak- 
sprigged wallpaper at the Albemarle. 

A few days before, Henry's mother had stopped in to see me, after she'd been 
down the hall to see her own son in the morgue. 

I wish I remembered more of her visit. All I remember is a pretty lady with 
dark hair and Henry's eyes: one of a stream of visitors, real and imagined, 
living and dead, who drifted in and out of my room, clustering around my bed 
at all hours. Julian. My dead grandfather. Bunny, indifferent, clipping his 
fingernails. 

She held my hand. I had tried to save her son's life. There was a doctor in the 
room, a nurse or two. I saw Henry himself, over her shoulder, standing in the 
corner in his old gardening clothes. 

It was only when I was leaving the hospital, and found the keys to Henry's 
car among my things, that I remembered something she'd tried to tell me. In 
going through Henry's affairs, she'd discovered that before he died, he was in 
the process of transferring the registration of his car to my name (which fit 
neatly with the official story — suicidal young man, giving away his 
possessions; no one, not even the police, ever tried to reconcile this generosity 
with the fact that, when Henry died, he believed himself in danger of losing 
the car). At any rate, the BMW was mine. She'd picked it out herself, she said, 
as a present for his nineteenth birthday. She couldn't bear to sell it, or to see it 
again. This she tried to tell me, crying softly in a chair beside my bed as 
Henry padded about in the shadows behind her; preoccupied, unnoticed by the 


nurses; rearranging, with meticulous care, a disordered vase of flowers. 

You would think, after all we'd been through, that Francis and the twins and 
1 would have kept in better touch over the years. But after Henry died, it was 
as if some thread which bound us had been abruptly severed, and soon after 
we began to drift apart. 

Francis was in Manhattan the whole summer that I was in Brooklyn. During 
that time we talked on the telephone maybe five times and saw each other 
twice. Both times were in a bar on the Upper East Side, directly downstairs 
from his mother's apartment. He didn't like to venture far from home, he said; 
crowds made him nervous; two blocks away, he said, and he started to feel as 
though the buildings were going to collapse on him. His hands fidgeted 
around the ashtray. He was seeing a doctor. He was doing a lot of reading. 
The people at the bar all seemed to know him. 

The twins were in Virginia, sequestered at their grandmother's, 
incommunicado. Camilla sent me three postcards that summer and called me 
twice. Then in October, when I was back at school, she wrote to say that 
Charles had stopped drinking, hadn't had a drop for over a month. There was a 
Christmas card. 

In February, a card on my birthday — conspicuously lacking in news of 
Charles. And then, after that, for a long time, nothing. 

Around the time I graduated, there was a sporadic renewal of 
communications. 'Who would've thought,’ wrote Francis, 'that you'd be the 
only one of us to make it out with a diploma.' 

Camilla sent her congratulations, and called a couple of times. 

There was some talk from both of them about coming up to Hampden, to 
watch me walk down the aisle, but this did not materialize and I was not very 
surprised when it didn't. 

I had started to date Sophie Dearbold, my senior year of school, and during 
my last term I moved into her apartment off-campus: on Water Street, just a 
few doors down from Henry's house, where his Madame Isaac Pereire roses 
were running wild in the back yard (he never lived to see them bloom, it 
occurs to me, those roses that smelled like raspberries) and where the boxer 
dog, sole survivor of his chemistry experiments, ran out to bark at me when I 
walked by. Sophie had a job, after school, with a dance company in Los 
Angeles. We thought we were in love. There was some talk of getting 
married. Though everything in my subconscious was warning me not to (at 
night I dreamed of car crashes, freeway snipers, the glowing eyes of feral 
dogs in suburban parking lots) I restricted my applications for graduate 
fellowships to schools in Southern California. 

We hadn't been out there six months when Sophie and I broke up. I was 
uncommunicative, she said. She never knew what I was thinking. The way I 
looked at her sometimes, when I woke up in the morning, frightened her. 

I spent all my time in the library, reading the Jacobean dramatists. 

Webster and Middleton, Tourneur and Ford. It was an_ obscure 


specialization, but the candlelit and treacherous universe in which they moved 
— of sin unpunished, of innocence destroyed — was one I found appealing. 
Even the titles of their plays were strangely seductive, trapdoors to something 
beautiful and wicked that trickled beneath the surface of mortality: The 
Malcontent. The White Devil. The Broken Heart. I pored over them, made 
notes in the margins. The Jacobeans had a sure grasp of catastrophe. They 
understood not only evil, it seemed, but the extravagance of tricks with which 
evil presents itself as good. I felt they cut right to the heart of the matter, to 
the essential rottenness of the world. 

I had always loved Christopher Marlowe, and I found myself thinking a lot 
about him, too. 'Kind Kit Marlowe,’ a contemporary had called him. He was a 
scholar, the friend of Raleigh and of Nashe, the most brilliant and educated of 
the Cambridge wits. 

He moved in the most exalted literary and political circles; of all his fellow 
poets, the only one to whom Shakespeare ever directly alluded was he; and 
yet he was also a forger, a murderer, a man of the most dissolute companions 
and habits, who ‘dyed swearing’ in a tavern at the age of twenty-nine. His 
companions on that day were a spy, a pickpocket, and a 'bawdy serving-man..' 

One of them stabbed Marlowe, fatally, just above the eye: 'of which wound 
the aforesaid Christ. Marlowe died instantly. 

I often thought of these lines of his, from Doctor Faustus: I think my master 
shortly means to die For he hath given me all his goods... and of this one, 
spoken as an aside on the day that Faustus in his black robes went to the 
emperor's court: I'faith, he looks much like a conjurer. 

When I was writing my dissertation, on Tourneur's The Revenger's Tragedy, 
I received the following letter from Francis. 

Dear Richard: 

I wish I could say that this is a difficult letter for me to write but in fact it is 
not. My life has been for many years in a process of dissolution and it seems 
to me that now, finally, it is time for me to do the honorable thing. 

So this is the last chance I will have to speak to you, in this world at least. 
What I want to say to you is this. Work hard. Be happy with Sophie. He did not 
know about our breakup. Forgive me, for all the things I did but mostly for the ones 
that I did not. 

Mais, vrai, j'ai trop pleure! Les aubes sont navrantes. What a sad and. 
beautiful line that is. I'd always hoped that someday I'd have the chance to use 
it. And maybe the dawns will be less harrowing in that country for which I 
shortly depart. Then again, the Athenians think death to be merely sleep. Soon 
I will know for myself. 

, wonder if I will see Henry on the other side. If I do, 1 am looking forward 
to asking him why the hdl he didn't just shoot us all and get it over with. 

Don't feel too bad about any of this. Really. 

Cheerily, Francis 
I had not seen him in three years. The letter was postmarked Boston, four 


days earlier. I dropped everything and drove to the airport and got on the first 
plane to Logan, where I found Francis in Brigham and Women's Hospital 
recuperating from two razor-blade cuts to the wrist. 

He looked terrible. He was pale as a corpse. The maid, he said, had found 
him in the bathtub. 

He had a private room. Rain was pounding on the gray windowpanes. I was 
terribly glad to see him and he, I think, to see me. We talked for hours, about 
nothing, really. 

‘Did you hear I'm going to get married?’ he said presently. 

'No,' I said, startled. 

I thought he was joking. But then he pushed up in his bed a bit and riffled 
through his night table and found a photograph of her, which he showed to 
me. Blue-eyed blonde, tastefully clad, built along the Marion line. 

‘She's pretty.’ 

‘She's stupid,’ said Francis passionately. 'I hate her. Do you know what my 
cousins call her? The Black Hole." 

"Why is that?’ 

"Because the conversation turns into a vacuum whenever she walks into the 
room.’ 

"Then why are you going to marry her?’ 

For a moment he didn't answer. Then he said: 'I was seeing someone. A 
lawyer. He's a bit of a drunk but that's all right. He went to Harvard. You'd 
like him. His name is Kim.' 

‘And?! 

‘And my grandfather found out. In the most melodramatic way you can 
possibly imagine. 

He reached for a cigarette. I had to light it for him because of his hands. He 
had injured one of the tendons that led to his thumb. 

‘So,’ he said, blowing out a plume of smoke. 'I have to get married.’ 

‘Or what?’ 

‘Or my grandfather will cut me off without a cent.’ 

‘Can't you get by on your own?’ I said. 

'No.' 

He said this with such certainty that it irritated me. 

'I do,’ I said. 

"But you're used to it.' 

Just then the door to his room cracked open. It was his nurse — not from the 
hospital, but one that his mother had privately engaged. 

"Mr Abernathy" she said brightly. 'There's someone here who wants to see 
you!’ 

Francis closed his eyes, then opened them. 'It's her,' he said. 

The nurse withdrew. We looked at each other. 

‘Don't do it, Francis,' I said. 

Tve got to.' 


The door opened, and the blonde in the photograph — all smiles — waltzed in, 
wearing a pink sweater with a pattern of snowflakes knit into it, and her hair 
tied back with a pink ribbon. 

She was actually quite pretty. Among her armload of presents were a teddy 
bear; jelly beans wrapped in cellophane; copies of GQ, The Atlantic Monthly, 
Esquire: good God, I thought, since when does Francis read magazines? 

She walked over to the bed, kissed him briskly on the forehead. 

‘Now, sweetie,’ she said to him, 'I thought we'd decided not to smoke. 

To my surprise, she plucked the cigarette from between his fingers and put it 
out in the ashtray. Then she looked over at me and beamed. 

Francis ran a bandaged hand through his hair. ‘Priscilla,’ he said tonelessly, 
this is my friend Richard.’ 

Her blue eyes widened. 'Hi!' she said. 'I've heard so much about you!’ 

‘And I about you,’ I said politely. 

She pulled up a chair to Francis's bed. Pleasant, still smiling, she sat down. 

And, as if by magic, the conversation stopped. 

Camilla showed up in Boston the next day; she, too, had got a letter from 
Francis. 

I was drowsing in the bedside chair. I'd been reading to Francis, Our Mutual 
Friend — funny, now I think about it, how much my time with Francis at the 
hospital in Boston was like the time that Henry spent at the hospital in 
Vermont with me — and when I woke up, awakened by Francis's exclamation 
of surprise, and saw her standing there in the dreary Boston light, I thought 
that I was dreaming. 

She looked older. Cheeks a bit hollower. Different hair, cut very short. 
Without realizing it, I had come to think of her, too, as a ghost: but to see her, 
wan but still beautiful, in the flesh, my heart gave such a glad and violent leap 
that I thought it would burst, I thought I would die, right there. 

Francis sat up in bed and held out his arms. 'Darling,' he said. 

‘Come here.’ 

The three of us were in Boston together for four days. It rained the whole 
time. Francis got out of the hospital on the second day — which, as it 
happened, was Ash Wednesday. 

I had never been to Boston before; I thought it looked like the London I had 
never seen. Gray skies, sooty brick townhouses, Chinese magnolias in the fog. 
Camilla and Francis wanted to go to mass, and 1 went along with them. The 
church was crowded and drafty. I went to the altar with them to get ashes, 
shuffling along in the swaying line. The priest was bent, in black, very old. He 
made a cross on my forehead with the flat of his thumb. Dust thou art, to dust 
thou shall return .1 stood up again when it was time for communion, but 
Camilla caught my arm and hastily pulled me back. The three of us stayed in 
our seats as the pews emptied and the long, shuffling line started towards the 
altar again. 

"You know,’ said Francis, on the way out, 'I once made the mistake of asking 


Bunny if he ever thought about Sin.’ 

"What did he say?1 asked Camilla. 

Francis snorted. 'He said «No, of course not. I'm not a Catholic."' 

We loitered all afternoon in a dark little bar on Boylston Street, smoking 
cigarettes and drinking Irish whiskey. The talk turned to Charles. He, it 
seemed, had been an intermittent guest at Francis's over the course of the past 
few years. 

‘Francis lent him quite a bit of money about two years ago,’ 

Camilla said. 'It was good of him, but he shouldn't have done it.’ 

Francis shrugged and drank off the rest of his glass. It was clear the subject 
made him uncomfortable. 'I wanted to,' he said. 

"You'll never see it again.’ 

"That's all right.’ 

I was consumed with curiosity. ‘Where is Charles?’ 

‘Oh, he's getting by,’ said Camilla. It was clear the topic made her 
uncomfortable, too. 'He worked for my uncle for a little while. Then he had a 
job playing piano in a bar — which, as you can imagine, didn't work out so 
well. Our Nana was distraught. 

Finally she had to have my uncle tell him that if he didn't shape up, he was 
going to have to move out of the house. So he did. 

He got himself a room in town and went on working at the bar. 

But they finally fired him and he had to come home again. That was when he 
started coming up here. It was good of you,’ she said to Francis, 'to put up 
with him the way you did.’ 

He was staring down into his drink. 'Oh,' he said, ‘it's all right.’ 

"You were very kind to him.' 

'He was my friend.’ 

‘Francis,’ said Camilla, ‘lent Charles the money to put himself into a 
treatment place. A hospital. But he only stayed about a week. He ran off with 
some thirty-year-old woman he met in the detox ward. Nobody heard from 
them for about two months. 

Finally the woman's husband ' 

‘She was married? 

"Yes. Had a baby, too. A little boy. Anyway, the woman's husband finally 
hired a private detective, and he tracked them down in San Antonio. They 
were living in this horrible place, a dump. Charles was washing dishes in a 
diner, and she — well, I don't know what she was doing. They were both in 
kind of bad shape. But neither of them wanted to come home. They were very 
happy, they said.' 

She paused to take a sip of her drink. 

‘And?’ I said. 

‘And they're still down there,’ she said. 'In Texas. Though they're not in San 
Antonio anymore. They were in Corpus Christi for a while. The last we heard 
they'd moved to Galveston. 


"Doesn't he ever call?’ 

There was a long pause. Finally, she said: 'Charles and I don't really talk 
anymore.’ 

‘Not at all?’ 

'Not really, no.' She took another drink of her whiskey. ‘It's broken my 
Nana's heart,’ she said. 

In the rainy twilight, we walked back to Francis's through the Public 
Gardens. The lamps were lit. 

Very suddenly, Francis said: 'You know, I keep expecting Henry to show 
up. 

I was a bit unnerved by this. Though I hadn't mentioned it, I'd been thinking 
the same thing. What was more, ever since arriving in Boston I'd kept 
catching glimpses of people I thought were him: dark figures dashing by in 
taxicabs, disappearing into office buildings. 

"You know, I thought I saw him when I was lying in the bathtub,’ said 
Francis. ‘Faucet dripping, blood all over the goddamned place. I thought I saw 
him standing there in his bathrobe — you know, that one with all the pockets 
that he kept his cigarettes and stuff in — over by the window, with his back 
half-turned, and he said to me, in this really disgusted voice: «Well, Francis, I 
hope you're happy now." 

We kept walking. Nobody said anything. 

It's funny,’ said Francis. 'I have a hard time believing he's really dead. I 
mean —1 know there's no way he could have faked dying — but, you know, if 
anybody could figure out how to come back, it's him. It's kind of like Sherlock 
Holmes. Going over the Reichenbach Falls. I keep expecting to find that it 
was all a trick, that he'll turn up any day now with some kind of elaborate 
explanation.’ 

We were crossing a bridge. Yellow streamers of lamplight shimmered bright 
in the inky water. 

"Maybe it really was him that you saw,’ I said. 

"What do you mean?’ 

'I thought I saw him too,' I said, after a long, thoughtful pause. 

‘In my room. While I was in the hospital.’ 

"Well, you know what Julian would say,’ said Francis. "There are such things 
as ghosts. People everywhere have always known that. And we believe in 
them every bit as much as Homer did. 

Only now, we call them by different names. Memory. The unconscious.’ 

‘Do you mind if we change the subject?’ Camilla said, quite suddenly. 
‘Please?’ 

Camilla had to leave on Friday morning. Her grandmother wasn't well, she 
said, she had to get back. I didn't have to be back in California until the 
following week. 

As I stood with her on the platform — she impatient, tapping her foot, leaning 
forward to look down the tracks — it seemed more than I could bear to see her 


go. Francis was around the corner, buying her a book to read on the train. 

'I don't want you to leave,’ I said. 

'I don't want to, either.’ 

Then don't.’ 

'I have to.' 

We stood looking at each other. It was raining. She looked at me with her 
rain-colored eyes. 

‘Camilla, I love you,’ I said. 'Let's get married. 

She didn't answer for the longest time. Finally she said: 'Richard, you know I 
can't do that.’ 

"Why not?’ 

'I can't. I can't just pick up and go to California. My grandmother is old. She 
can't get around by herself anymore. She needs someone to look after her.’ 

‘So forget California. I'll move back East.' 

‘Richard, you can't. What about your dissertation? School?’ 

'I don't care about school.’ 

We looked at each other for a long time. Finally, she looked away. 

"You should see the way I live now, Richard,’ she said. 'My Nana's in bad 
shape. It's all I can do to take care of her, and that big house, too. I don't have 
a single friend my own age. I can't even remember the last time I read a book.’ 

'I could help you.' 

'I don't want you to help me.' She raised her head and looked at me: her gaze 
hit me hard and sweet as a shot of morphine. 

Till get down on my knees if you want me to,’ I said. 'Really, I will.’ 

She closed her eyes, dark-lidded, dark shadows beneath them; she really was 
older, not the glancing-eyed girl I had fallen in love with but no less beautiful 
for that; beautiful now in a way that less excited my senses than tore at my 
very heart. 

'I can't marry you,’ she said. 

"Why not?’ 

I thought she was going to say, Because I don't love you, which probably 
would have been more or less the truth, but instead, to my surprise, she said: 
"Because I love Henry.’ 

"Henry's dead.’ 

T can't help it. I still love him.' 

T loved him, too,' I said. 

For just a moment, I thought I felt her waver. But then she looked away. 

'I know you did,’ she said. 'But it's not enough.’ 

The rain stayed with me all the way back to California. An abrupt departure, 
I knew, would be too much; if I was to leave the East at all, I could do so only 
gradually and so I rented a car, and drove and drove until finally the landscape 
changed, and I was in the Midwest, and the rain was all I had left of Camilla's 
goodbye kiss. Raindrops on the windshield, radio stations fading in and out. 
Cornfields bleak in all those gray, wide-open reaches. I had said goodbye to 


her once before, but it took everything I had to say goodbye to her then, again, 
for the last time, like poor Orpheus turning for a last backwards glance at the 
ghost of his only love and in the same heartbeat losing her forever: hinc iliac 
lacrimae, hence those tears. 

I suppose nothing remains now but to tell you what happened, as far as I 
know, to the rest of the players in our story. 

Cloke Rayburn, amazingly, ended up going to law school. He is now an 
associate in mergers and acquisitions at Milbank Tweed in New York, where, 
interestingly, Hugh Corcoran was just made partner. Word is Hugh got him 
the job. This might or might not be true, but I tend to think it is, as Cloke 
almost certainly did not distinguish himself wherever it was that he happened 
to matriculate. He lives not far from Francis and Priscilla, on Lexington and 
Eighty-first (Francis, by the way, is supposed to have an incredible apartment; 
Priscilla's dad, who's in real estate, gave it to them for a wedding present) and 
Francis, who still has trouble sleeping, says he runs into him every now and 
then in the wee hours of the morning at the Korean deli where they both buy 
their cigarettes. 

Judy Poovey is now something of a minor celebrity. A certified Aerobics 
instructor, she appears regularly — with a bevy of other muscle-toned beauties 
— on an exercise program, 'Power Moves!’ on cable TV. 

After school, Frank and Jud went in together and bought the Farmer's Inn, 
which has become the preferred Hampden hangout. Supposedly they're doing 
a great business. They have a lot of old Hampdenians working for them, 
including Jack Teitelbaum and Rooney Wynne, according to a feature article 
not long ago in the alumni magazine. 

Somebody told me that Bram Guernsey was in the Green Berets, though I 
tend to think this is untrue. 

Georges Laforgue is still on the Literature and Languages faculty at 
Hampden, where his enemies have still not managed to supplant him. 

Dr Roland is retired from active teaching. He lives in Hampden town, and 
has published a book of photographs of the college through the years, which 
has made him much sought-after as an after-dinner speaker at the various 
clubs in town. He was almost the cause of my not being admitted to graduate 
school by writing me a recommendation which — though it was a glowing one 
repeatedly referred to me as ‘Jerry.’ 

The feral cat that Charles found turned out, surprisingly, to be a rather good 
pet. He took up with Francis's cousin Mildred over the summer and in the fall 
made the move with her to Boston, where he now lives, quite contentedly, in a 
ten-room apartment on Exeter Street under the name of Princess.’ 

Marion is married now, to Brady Corcoran. They live in Tarrytown, New 
York — an easy commute for Brady into the city — and the two of them have a 
baby now, a girl. She has the distinction of being the first female born into the 
Corcoran clan for no one even knows how many generations. According to 
Francis, Mr Corcoran is absolutely wild about her, to the exclusion of all his 


other children, grandchildren, and pets. She was christened Mary Katherine, a 
name which has fallen more and more into disuse, as — for reasons best known 
to themselves — the Corcorans have chosen to give her the nickname "Bunny. 

Sophie I hear from now and again. She injured her leg and was out of 
commission with the dance company for a while, but recently she was given a 
big role in a new piece. We go out to dinner sometimes. Mostly when she 
calls it's late at night, and she wants to talk about her boyfriend problems. I 
like Sophie. I guess you could say she's my best friend here. But somehow I 
never really forgave her for making me move back to this godforsaken place. 

I have not laid eyes on Julian since that last afternoon with Henry, in his 
office. Francis — with extraordinary difficulty managed to get in touch with 
him a couple of days before Henry's funeral. He said that Julian greeted him 
cordially; listened politely to the news of Henry's demise; then said: 'I 
appreciate it, Francis. 

But I'm afraid there's really nothing more that I can do.’ 

About a year ago Francis repeated to me a rumor — which we subsequently 
found was complete romance — that Julian had been appointed royal tutor to 
the little crown prince of Suaoriland, somewhere in East Africa. But this 
story, though false, took on a curious life in my imagination. What better fate 
for Julian than someday being the power behind the Suaori throne, than 
transforming his pupil into a philosopher-king? (The prince in the fiction was 
only eight .1 wonder what I should be now if Julian had got hold of me when I 
was only eight years old.) 1 like to think that maybe he — as Aristotle did — 
would bring up a man who would conquer the world. 

But then, as Francis said, maybe not. 

I don't know what happened to Agent Davenport — I expect he's still living in 
Nashua, New Hampshire — but Detective Sciola is dead. He died of lung 
cancer maybe three years ago. I discovered this from a public service 
announcement that I saw late one night on television. It shows Sciola 
standing, gaunt and Dantesque, against a black backdrop. 'By the time you see 
this announcement,’ he says, 'I will be dead.’ He goes on to say that it wasn't a 
career in law enforcement that killed him but two packs of cigarettes a day. I 
saw this at about three o'clock in the morning, alone in my apartment, on a 
black-and-white set with lots of interference. White noise and snow. He 
seemed to be speaking directly at me, right out of the television set. For a 
moment I was disoriented, seized by panic; could a ghost embody itself 
through wavelengths, electronic dots, a picture tube? What are the dead, 
anyway, but waves and energy? Light shining from a dead star? 

That, by the way, is a phrase of Julian's. I remember it from a lecture of hxis 
on the Iliad., when Patroklos appears to Achilles in a dream. There is a very 
moving passage where Achilles overjoyed at the sight of the apparition — tries 
to throw his arms around the ghost of his old friend, and it vanishes. The dead 
appear to us in dreams, said Julian, because that's the only way they can make 
us see them; what we see is only a projection, beamed from a great distance, 


light shining at us from a dead star... 

Which reminds me, by the way, of a dream I had a couple of weeks ago. 

I found myself in a strange deserted city — an old city, like London — 
underpopulated by war or disease. It was night; the streets were dark, 
bombed-out, abandoned. For a long time, I wandered aimlessly — past ruined 
parks, blasted statuary, vacant lots overgrown with weeds and collapsed 
apartment houses with rusted girders poking out of their sides like ribs. But 
here and there, interspersed among the desolate shells of the heavy old public 
buildings, I began to see new buildings, too, which were connected by 
futuristic walkways lit from beneath. Long, cool perspectives of modern 
architecture, rising phosphorescent and eerie from the rubble. 

I went inside one of these new buildings. It was like a laboratory, maybe, or 
a museum. My footsteps echoed on the tile floors. There was a cluster of men, 
all smoking pipes, gathered around an exhibit in a glass case that gleamed in 
the dim light and lit their faces ghoulishly from below. 

I drew nearer. In the case was a machine revolving slowly on a turntable, a 
machine with metal parts that slid in and out and collapsed in upon 
themselves to form new images. An Inca temple... click click click... the 
Pyramids... the Parthenon. 

History passing beneath my very eyes, changing every moment. 

'I thought I'd find you here,’ said a voice at my elbow. 

It was Henry. His gaze was steady and impassive in the dim light. Above his 
ear, beneath the wire stem of his spectacles, I could just make out the powder 
burn and the dark hole in his right temple. 

I was glad to see him, though not exactly surprised. 'You know, I said to 
him, 'everybody is saying that you're dead.’ 

He stared down at the machine. The Colosseum... click click click... the 
Pantheon. 'I'm not dead,’ he said. 'I'm only having a bit of trouble with my 
passport.’ 

"What?' 

He cleared his throat. 'My movements are restricted,’ he said. 

'I no longer have the ability to travel as freely as I would like. 

Hagia Sophia. St. Mark's, in Venice. 'What is this place?’ I asked him. 

‘That information is classified, I'm afraid.’ 

1 looked around curiously. It seemed that I was the only visitor. 

‘Is it open to the public?’ I said. 

"Not generally, no.' 

I looked at him. There was so much I wanted to ask him, so much I wanted 
to say; but somehow I knew there wasn't time and even if there was, that it 
was all, somehow, beside the point. 

"Are you happy here?’ I said at last. 

He considered this for a moment. 'Not particularly,’ he said. 

"But you're not very happy where you are, either.’ 


St. Basil's, in Moscow. Chartres. Salisbury and Amiens. He glanced at his 
watch. 


'I hope you'll excuse me,’ he said, ‘but I'm late for an appointment.’ 


He turned from me and walked away. I watched his back receding down the 
long, gleaming hall. 


The End 


Acknowledgments ^ 


Thanks to Binky Urban, whose dauntless efforts on behalf of this book leave 
me speechless; to Sonny Mehta, who made everything possible; to Gary 
Fisketjon il migliorfabbro', and to Garth Battista and Marie Behan, whose 
patience with me sometimes makes me want to weep. 


And — despite the risk of sounding like a Homeric catalogue of ships — the 
following people must all be thanked for their aid, inspiration and love: Russ 
Dallen, Greta Edwards Anthony, Claude Fredericks, Cheryl Gilman, Edna 
Golding, Barry Hannah, Ben Herring, Beatrice Hill, Mary Minter Krotzer, 
Antoinette Linn, Caitlin Mc Caffrey, Joe Mc Ginniss, Paul and Louise Mc 
Gloin, Mark Mc Nairy, Willie Morris, Erin 'Maxfield' Parish, Delia Reid, 
Pascale Retourner-Raab, Jim and Mary Robison, Elizabeth Seelig, Mark 
Shaw, Orianne Smith, Maura Spiegel, Richard Stilwell, Mackenzie Stubbins, 
Rebecca Tartt, Minnie Lou Thompson, Arturo Vivante, Taylor Weatherall, 
Alice Welsh, Thomas Yarker and, most of all, that dear old bad old Boushe 
family. 


About the Author ^ 


Donna Tartt was educated at the University of Mississippi and Bennington 
College, and is the author of a second novel, The Little Friend. She lives in 
Mississippi and New York City. Cover Blurb The Secret History 'The Secret 
History tells the story of a group of classics students at an elite American 
college, who are cerebral, obsessive and finally murderous... it is a haunting, 
compelling and brilliant piece of fiction’ The Times Tartt's erudition sprinkles 
the text like sequins, but she's such an adept writer that she's able to make the 
occasional swerve into Greek legends and semantics seem absolutely crucial 
to the examination of contemporary society which this book undoubtedly and 
seriously is, for all the fun it provides on the way... Brilliant’ Sunday Times 
'A highly readable murder mystery; a romantic dream of doomed youth and a 
disquisition on ancient and modern mores... Tartt shows an impressive ability 
to pace and pattern her novel’ Independent 'A huge, mesmerizing, galloping 
read, pleasurably devoured... gorgeously written, relentlessly erudite’ Vanity 
Fair The skill with which Tartt manipulates our sympathies and anticipations 
is... remarkable... A marvellous debut' Spectator 'Implicates the reader in a 
conspiracy which begins in bucolic enchantment and ends exactly where it 
must... a mesmerizing and powerful novel’ Jay McInerney 'A compelling 
read... this very young novelist has the arrogant boldness to tell us that it is in 
abstract, arcane scholarship and mandarin addictions that utter violence can 
flourish’ George Steiner, The Times Literary Supplement 'Mesmerizing and 
perverse’ Elaine Showalter, The Times Literary Supplement ‘Brilliant... a 
study of young arrogance, a thriller, a comedy of campus manners, and an 
oblique Greek primer. It is a well written and compulsive read' Evening 
Standard 


Skip to main content
Texts
Video
Audio
Software
Images

    Sign up for free
    Log in

Search metadata
Search text contents
Search TV news captions
Search radio transcripts
Search archived web sites
Advanced Search

    About Blog Projects Help Donate 

    Contact Jobs Volunteer People 

Full text of "Core Concepts of Marketing"
See other formats

H 









« ■ i /-j 



I El 

■ I *5 



Global Text 




ore L.oncepts o 



This book is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License 



Core Concepts of 
Marketing 



John Burnett 

Copyright © 2008 by John Burnett 

For any questions about this text, please email: drexel(5>uga.edu 
The Global Text Project is funded by the Jacobs Foundation, Zurich, Switzerland. 



kg) © 



This book is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License 



This edition was scanned and converted to text using Optical Character Recognition. We are in the process of 
converting this edition into the Global Text Project standard format. When this is complete, a new edition will be 
posted on the Global Text Project website and will be available in a variety of formats upon request. 



Core concepts of marketing 2 A Global Text 



PREFACE 



Through good economic times and bad, marketing remains the pivotal function in any busi- 
ness. Determining and satisfying the needs of customers through products that have value 
and accessibility and whose features are clearly communicated is the general purpose of 
any business. It is also a fundamental definition of marketing. This text introduces students 
to the marketing strategies and tools that practitioners use to market their products. 



BALANCED COVERAGE 



To emphasize how various marketiilg areas work together to create a cohesive strategy, I 
define and explain the various marketing areas and their comparative strengths and weak- 
nesses, as well as stress how to best "mix" marketing tools in a strategic, integrated plan. 
The book begins with a discussion of the marketing planning process, continues with a dis- 
cussion of the preliminary tasks of developing the plan, and concludes witb the tactics avail- 
able to the marketing planner. This complete coverage ensures that students will learn how 
to plan, execute, and evaluate a marketing program that is effective and efficient from start 
to finish. 



INTERNATIONAL ANDTECHNOLOGY COVERAGE 



Introducing Marketing recognizes the impact of the global community on marketing prac- 
tices. International implications are discussed in Chapter 6 and are also integrated into the 
text through relevant examples. 

Technology is altering many marketing practices. The World Wide Web. databases, 
tracking devices, and market simulations are only a few examples of the ways technology 
has affected marketing strategies. Technology coverage is woven throughout the text, fea- 
tures, and end-of-chapter materials of this book. (Note that because technology is chang- 
ing so rapidly, it is virtually impossible for a text such as this to remain absolutely current.) 



CURRENT EXAMPLES FROM ALL 
TYPES AND SIZES OF BUSINESS 



This book demonstrates how companies use marketing. Specific examples appear not only 
in text discussions, but also in the chapter openers, the Integrated Marketing and Newsline 
boxes, and the end of chapter cases. Examples and stories bring theory to life, demonstrating 
the relevance of the reaaing. The example subjects are vivid, current, and varied. They range 
from Fortune 500 companies to smaller, privately held businesses. The text also focuses on 
international companies of all sizes. 



VI PREFACE 



Learning is not always about success stories. Diagnosing problems and failures is an 
important aspect of critical thinking, and examples of such are introduced to challenge stu 
dents to learn from others' mistakes and better manage real-world problems. 



A CLEAR, EFFECTIVE ORGANIZATION 



Time is a precious commodity to instructors and students. Market feedback revealed that 
instructors want an introductory marketing text that (1) covers the basics well and (2) omits 
unnecessary detail. Careful selection of topics, appropriate depth of coverage, and concise 
writing helped us meet those two objectives. Instead of the typical 20-25 chapters, this text 
offers 10 chapters of manageable length. 



HELPFUL PEDAGOGY 



We introduce several features to reinforce learning and help students build business skills 
that they can use on tne job. Our comprenensive learning system enables students to mas- 
ter materials quickly and thoroughly. Some features of that system include opening vignettes, 
performance-basec learning objectives, concept reviews, Integrated Marketing boxes, 
Newsline boxes, end-of-chapter projects, and end-of chapter cases. 



SUPPLEMENTS OFTHE BOOK 



5 The Instructor's Manual with Test Questions provides helpful teaching ideas, advice 
on course development, sample assignments and chapter-by-chapter text highlights, 
learning objectives, lecture outlines, class exercises and more. This manual also 
includes multiple choice, true/false, and short answer text questions for each chapter. 

• PowerPoint Presentations are available for download via the text web site 
(www.wiley.com/college/burnett). These slides contain lecture outlines for each chap- 
ter of the text. 

• A computerized version of the Test Bank is available to instructors for customiza- 
tion of their exams. 

• Additional online resources are available to instructors via the text web site. These 
resources include: In Practice exerciser for each chapter, which relate directly to 
the Wall Street Journal articles on-line; an interactive Study Guide; interactive web- 
based cases; on-line chapter summaries; a Reading Room containing on-line arti- 
cles from the Wall Street Journal, which correlate with key concepts and topics within 
eacJl chapter of the text; and more. 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



introducing Marketing, First Edition benefits from insights provided from marketing edu- 
cators around the country that carefully read and critiqued draft chapters. I am pleased to 
express my appreciation to the following colleagues for their contributions: 



PREFACE VII 

Joe K. Ballenger 

Stephen F. Austin State TJniversity 

Dong Jin Lee 

State University of New York (SUNY), Bingha;nton 

Amit Bhatnagar 

University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee 

Thomas L. Ainscough 
College of William and Mary 

Jeffrey B. Schmidt 

University of Illinois at 'Jrbana-Champaign 

James V. Spiers 
Arizona State University 

I would also like to thank the Wiley team including my editor, Jeff Marshall, marketing 
manager. Charity Robey, production editor, Norine Pigliucci, Cindy Rhoads, Dawn Stan- 
ley, Mike Brennan, and Elyse Rieder for their hard work and support of this project. A great 
deal of thanks also goes to my friend and colleague, Pallab Paul, for his outstanding con- 
tributions to the web site. 



CONTENTS 



CHAPTER ONE INTRODUCING MARKETING 1 

Introduction 2 

Marketing: Definition and Justification 3 

Defining Marketing 3 

Justification for Study 6 

Characteristics of a Marketing Organization 7 

The Role of Marketing in the Firm: 
A Basis for Classification 12 

Strategic Components of Marketing 17 
Keys to Marketing Success 22 
Summary 24 
Marketer's Vocabulary 24 
Discussion Questions 24 
Project 25 

Case Application: The Hog Is Alive and Well 25 
References 26 



CHAPTERTWO 
THE MARKET 



UNDERSTANDING AND APPROACHING 



27 



Introduction 28 
Defining the Market 28 

The Market Is People 28 

The Market Is a Place 29 

The Market Is an Economic Entity 29 
Types of Markets 30 

Consumer Markets 30 

Industrial Markets 30 

Institutional Markets 30 

Reseller Markets 30 
Approaching the Market 31 

The Undifferentiated Market (Market Aggregation) 32 

Product Differentiation 33 

The Segmented Market 34 

The Strategy of Market Segmentation 45 
Summary 49 
Marketer's Vocabulary 49 
Discussion Questions 50 
Project 51 

Case Application: Rolling Rock Finds Its Niche 51 
References 52 



CHAPTER THREE MARKETING RESEARCH: AN AID TO 
DECISION MAKING 53 

Introduction 53 

The Nature and Importance of Marketing Research 54 
What Needs Researching in Marketing? 55 
Procedures and Techniques in Marketing Research 57 

Making a Preliminary Investigation 57 

Creating the Research Design 59 
Conducting the Research 67 
Processing the Data 67 
The Value of Marketing Research 67 
Summary 70 
Marketer's Vocabulary 70 
Discussion Questions 71 
Project 71 

Case Application: Research Saves the Day at Case 72 
References 72 



CHAPTER FOUR 

BEHAVIOR 73 



UNDERSTANDING BUYER 



Introduction 74 

Buyer Behavior and Exchange 74 

Buyer Behavior as Problem Solving 75 

The Decision Process 76 

Influencing Factors of Consumer Behavior 82 
Organizational Buyer Behavior 91 

Characteristics of Organizational Buying 91 

Stages in Organizational Buying 93 
Summary 98 
Marketer's Vocabulary 98 
Discussion Questions 99 
Project 99 

Case Application: Customer Satisfaction Still Matters 99 
References 1 00 



CHAPTER FIVE 

MARKETING 



EXTERNAL CONSIDERATIONS IN 



101 



Introduction 1 02 

External Factors that Affect Planning 

External Surprises 104 

Competitors 1 04 



103 



IX 



CONTENTS 



LegallEthicaJ Factors 106 

EconomiclPolitical Issues 110 

Technology 113 

Social Trends 115 

Forecasts of the Future 1 20 
Summary 123 
Marketer's Vocabulary 123 
Discussion Questions 123 
Project 1 24 
Case Application 124 
References 1 25 

CHAPTER SIX MARKETING IN 
GLOBAL MARKETS 126 



Introduction 127 

Defining International Marketing 1 27 
Standardization and Customization 128 
Reasons for Entering International Markets 129 
Reasons to Avoid International Markets 130 
The Stages of Going International 130 

Exporting 131 

Licensing 131 

Joint Ventures 1 32 

Direct Investment 132 

U.S. Commercial Centers 132 

Trade Intermediaries 1 3 3 

Alliances 133 
The International Marketing Plan 133 

The Corporate Level 1 34 

The Business Level 134 

The Functional Level 136 
The International Marketing Environment 139 

The SociaVCultural Environment 1 39 

The PoliticallLegal Environment 142 

The Technological Environment 144 

The Economic Environment 145 

The Competitive Environment 145 
Summary 148 
Marketer's Vocabulary 148 
Discussion Questions 149 
Project 149 

Case Application: Unilever's Global Brand 149 
References 1 50 



CHAPTER SEVEN 
PRODUCT 151 



INTRODUCING AND MANAGING THE 



Introduction 152 
Defining the Product 1 52 
Classification of Products 154 

Consumer Goods and Industrial Goods 155 

Goods Versus Services 157 



Product Planning and Strategy Formulation 159 
The Determination of Product Objectives 159 
The Product Plan 160 
Product Strategies 161 

Strategies for Developing New Products 1 68 
Step I: Generating New Product Ideas 173 
Step 2: Screening Product Development Ideas 
Step 3: Business Analysis 176 
Step 4: Technical and Marketing Development 
Step 5: Manufacturing Planning 1 78 
Step 6: Marketing Planning 178 
Step 7: Test Marketing 1 78 
Step 8: Commercialization 180 

Summary 182 

Marketer's Vocabulary 182 

Discussion Questions 183 

Project 183 

Case Application: Hershey Chocolate Milk 183 

References 184 



175 



178 



CHAPTER EIGHT 

MASS MARKETS 



COMMUNICATING TO 
185 



Introduction 186 
The Role of IMC 187 

Primary Tasks 187 

Integrated Marketing Communication 189 
The Meaning of Marketing Communication 189 
The Objectives of Marketing Communication 190 
How We Communicate 191 

Basic Elements of Communication 191 

Types of Communication Systems 193 

Marketing Communications 194 
Designing an IMC Strategy 194 

The Promotion Mix 197 

The Campaign 198 
Understanding Advertising 199 

The Organization of Advertising 199 

The Advertising Agency 200 

Developing the Creative Strategy 200 

Developing the Media Plan 201 

Banner Advertisements 202 
Sales Promotion and Public Relations 204 

Sales Promotion: A Little Bit of Everything 204 

Public Relations: The Art of Maintaining Goodwill 207 

Personal Selling and the Marketing 
Communication Mix 211 

Strengths and Weaknesses of Personal Selling 218 

The Sales Force of the Future 219 
Summary 222 
Marketer's Vocabulary 222 
Discussion Questions 223 



CONTENTS 



XI 



Project 224 

Case Application: The Microrecorder 

References 225 



224 



CHAPTER NINE PRICING THE PROD UCT 226 

Introduction 227 

Price Defined: Three Different Perspectives 227 

The Customer's View of Price 227 

Price from a Societal Perspective 228 

Rational Man Pricing: An Economic Perspective 229 

Irrational Man Pricing: Freedom Rules 230 

The Marketer's View of Price 230 
Pricing Objectives 230 
Developing a Pricing Strategy 231 

Nonprice Competition 232 

Competitive Pricing 234 
New Product Pricing 235 
Price Lines 237 
Price Flexibility 237 

Discounts and Allowances 237 
Price Bundling 240 
Psychological Aspects of Pricing 240 
Alternative Approaches to Determining Price 242 

Cost-Oriented Pricing: Cost-Pius and Mark-Ups 242 

Break-Even Analysis 243 

Target Rates of Return 244 

Demand-Oriented Pricing 244 

Value-Based Pricing 244 
The Future of Pricing 246 
Summary 248 
Marketer's Vocabulary 248 
Discussion Questions 248 
Project 249 

Case Application: United Techtronics 249 
References 250 



Organizing the Channel 267 

Conventional Channels 267 

Vertical Marketing Systems 268 

Horizontal Channel Systems 268 
The Channel Management Process 269 

Analyze the Consumer 269 

Establish the Channel Objectives 270 

Specify Distribution Tasks 270 

Evaluate and Select from Channel Alternatives 

Evaluating Channel Member PerfOlmance 272 
The Human Aspect of Distribution 2 73 

Role 273 

Communication 273 

Conflict 274 

Power 274 
Summary 276 
Marketer's Vocabulary 2 76 
Discussion Questions 277 
Project 277 

Case Application: Connecting Channel Members 277 
References 278 

PHOTO CREDITS 279 

INDEX 281 



CHAPTER TEN CHANNEL CONCEPTS: DISTRIBUTING 
THE PRODUCT 252 

Introduction 253 

The Dual Functions of Channels 253 

The Evolution of the Marketing Channel 254 

Flows in Marketing Channels 255 

Functions of the Channel 256 

Channel Institutions: Capabilities and Limitations 257 

Producer and Manufacturer 257 

Retailing 258 

Wholesaling 263 

Physical Distribution 264 



CHAPTER 



7 



INTRODUCING MARKETING 



LEARNING OBJECTIVES 



As you read the chapter, you should develop an understanding of the 
following key marketing concepts: 

The important role marketing can play in the success of an 
organization. 

Organizations that correctly employ marketing have several 
common characteristics. 

The various kinds of marketing. 

the strategic workings of marketing components. 



ELVIS-ALIVE AND WELL 



It's Elvis week in Memphis, and all over town they've got banners: '"20 years/Still 
Rocking.'" Is it just us, or is it weird to wax so upbeat about the twentieth anniversary of 
a death? You can't help but feel that the world's got the Elvis Presley it wanted: a 
changeless, ageless object of contemplation and veneration. Elvis Week culminates in an 
event called Elvis-The Concert 2000 in which the man himself, resurrected by video 
technology, will sing with his living ex-band mates and the Memphis Symphony Orches- 
tra. Who wouldn't secretly prefer this fail-safe digitized spectacle to a weary 62-year-old 
grinding out "If I Can Dream" one more time? 

Twenty years ago, no one close to Elvis could have imagined that his fans would 
spend over $250 million annually on Elvis dolls, plates, key chains, towels, and wigs-to 
name just a few items. Two years after Elvis's death, his estate was worth less on paper than 
it owed in taxes. Then, in 1979, Priscilla Presley, Elvis's ex-wife, was named an executor of 
the estate for her daughter. The family's crown jewels-Elvis's recordings-had been sold 
off years earlier and Priscilla had just one chance to save the legacy. She gambled that 
Elvis's name, image, and likeness were worth something. And she turned his home into a 
roadside attraction to fmance a legal war, fighting for control of all that was Elvis. 

Priscilla concluded that there was only one way to save Graceland: sell tickets to 
the hundreds of gawkers who daily pressed their faces against Elvis's gates. Meanwhile, 
why not sell some gewgaws to the fans that were already buying cheesy trinkets at the 
strip mall across the street? Buoyed by an initial investment of $560,000, Graceland's 
doors were opened to the public in 1982. It took 38 days to recoup their investment; 
350,000 visitors walked through the house the first year. "I felt I was betraying Elvis," 
says Priscilla, recalling her decision to enter the amusement business. "Graceland was 



CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCING MARKETING 



1 % 

1 Addn 


% Q « 


0^ 


fc^ = Elvls.com Ihe Official Site -— 

& O Q A & £ 

Favorite Piscary S^rch Autcfili Ur^r Small*!* 


Print Mill 


-■ - — ■m s 


£s:f-v|lhttp;//wwiVjeKn£^Mnydfrfj 






II^Gr,!! «J 


oogfe ^Hwv*r'5 Qnlirw 


- The Business P& t*ork - Horn* F,^ (^ Iriwge M oPacje ^j^Tbe Center for M& leculav £ wtoqy of" RK A at UCSC 


k 


/°/07/)/O 


/ 


)^L 


W 




news 

elvisology [ 


1 


c{/yy j 


( 


J SU&V- 


1* 


graceland mansion j 1 


J 








■rp^V&j *f* 


-f) 


elvis presley's memp »| 


■*-t$f *=■ 




■ 


jfflT 


•%Z7i . 


elvis pmsley' is heart HI 


^^H 






y 


MBr] '*/ ' 


- / 


elvis - the concert 1 1 




ffip now 


K 


I 




'4 


shop elvis j 

fan relations 

presleyplace 1! 

n : 


8 


ii=i- : ^'S -5 virtual *i£tf 
Iirf[~: to Gracel*^ 

fij.^*- ■.-.- iVi fjn- 

[IJH ivl -.'jl j: i 

ByflHiN'tihiKi; 


► 


I 




■' J 


free"* | 

WiiitElviiiiiRI 

HPff S I 


» 




> elvis week 

> vigilciisl" 

> weddings 


CI 


vter to win o trio to Graceland at 




out.* . ■ | 


ck2^t tisic.com 


[ 


a: 












' ■ , . . !► 


LjSLS; 


rraoyesttw taclta-". 












.* 



Elvis Presley Enterprises, Inc. 



his pride and joy. But it came down to the reality that I had to open it up for my daugh- 
ter's future." 

Today 750,000 people visit Graceland each of them under 35, which 

suggests this is a business with a future. The marsion has upgraded its public facilities 
many times over the years, but there still are no vending machines on the grounds and 
the lawns have never been turned into a parking lot. The original 24 acres have been 
expanded into an 80-acre compound and Priscilla intends to add a hotel to the complex. 
There are also plans for a casino in Las Vegas-perhaps with an Elvis wedding chapel- 
and an international chain of Hard Rock Cafe-style restaurants called Elvis Presley's 
Memphis. Finally, a staff of ten lawyers is employed full-time by Elvis Presley Enter- 
prises simply to protect El vis's image from interlopers. 

Sources: Corie Brown, "Look Who's Taking Care of Business," Newsweek, August 18, 1997, p. 62. Karen Schoemer, "Burning 
Love," Newsweek, August 18, 1997, pp. 58-61. G. Brown, "More Earll' Elvis Unearthed. The Denver Post. August 15, 1997, 
p. 9F. Greg Hassell, "King ofTrees Rises From Graceland," Houston Chronicle, Dec. 8,1999, p. 11. Duncan Hughes, "Elvis is 
Back From the Dead Financially," Sunday Business, August 15, 1999, p. 23. 



INTRODUCTION 



The success of Elvis Presley Enterprises was a result of the insights and courage of Priscilla 
Presley. Despite her lack of formal training in marketing, she exhibited a creative approach 



MARKETING: DEFINITION AND JUSTIFICATION 3 

toward doing business that will become more and more necessary as the 21 st century con- 
tinues. Innovative thinking has become a prerequisite for success in today's global envi- 
ronment, which is saturated with near clone products being sold by millions of comparable 
competitors. The status quo will no longer suffice. The need for constant change paired with 
clear strategies is now essential. 

Marketing constitutes just one of the functions available to every business. Along with 
research, production, finance, accounting, and a myriad of other functions, marketing con- 
tributes to the ability of a business to succeed. In many businesses, marketing may be deemed 
of highest importance; in others, it may be relegated to a lesser role. The very existence of 
business depends upon successful products and services, which in turn rely on successful 
marketing. For this reason, every business person will benefit from even basic marketing 
knowledge. Moreover, marketing principles have been effectively applied to several non- 
business institutions for more than 30 years. Bankers, physicians, accounting firms, invest- 
ment analysts, politicians, churches, architectural firms, universities, and the United Way 
have all come to appreciate the benefits of marketing. 

A word of warning: there is a long-standing myth that marketing is easy. After going 
through this book you may conclude that marketing is interesting, fun, challenging—even 
vague-but it is not easy. Whether you like numbers or hate numbers, like people or hate 
people, like doing the same thing every day or like constant change there are opportuni- 
ties for you in marketing. 



MARKETING: DEFINITION AND JUSTIFICATION 



Defining Marketing 

Noted Harvard Professor of Business Theodore Levitt, states that the purpose of all busi- 
ness is to "find and keep customers." Furthermore, the only way you can achieve this objec- 
tive is to create a competitive advantage. That is, you must convince buyers (potential 
customers) that what you have to offer them comes closest to meeting their particular need 
or want at that point in time. Hopefully, you will be able to provide this advantage consis- 
tently, so that eventually the customer will no longer consider other alternatives and will 
purchase your product out of habit. This loyal behavior is exhibited by people who drive 
only Fords, brush their teeth only with Crest, buy only Dell computers, and have their plumb- 
ing fixed only by "Samson Plumbing-On Call 24 hours, 7 days a week." Creating this 
blind commitment- without consideration of alternatives-to a particular brand, store, per- 
son, or idea is the dream of all businesses. It is unlikely to occur, however, without the sup- 
port of an effective marketing program . In fact, the specific role of marketing is to provide 
assistance in identifying, satisfying, and retaining customers. 

While the general tasks of marketing are somewhat straightforward, attaching an accept- 
able definition to the concept has been difficu't. A textbook writer once noted, "Marketing 
is not easy to define. No one has yet been able to formulate a clear, concise definition that 
finds universal acceptance." Yet a definition of some sort is necessary if we are to layout 
the boundaries of what is properly to be considered "marketing." How do marketing activ- 
ities differ from nonmarketing activities? What activities should one refer to as marketing 
activities? What institutions should one refer to as marketing institutions? 

Marketing is advertising to advertising agencies, events to event marketers, knock- 
ing on doors to salespeople, direct mail to direct mailers. In other words, to a person with 
a hammer, everything looks like a nail. In reality, marketing is a way ofthinking about busi- 
ness, rather than a bundle of techniques. It's ;nuch more than just selling stuff and collect- 
ing money. It's the connection between people and products, customers and companies. Like 



CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCING MARKETING 



organic tissue, this kind of connection-orrelationship-is always growing or dying. It can 
rever be in a steady state. And like tissue paper, this kind of connection is fragile. Cus- 
tomer relationships, even long-standing ones, are contingent on the last trung that happened. 
Tracing the evolution of the various definitions of marketing proposed during the last 
thirty years reveals two trends: 1) expansion of the application of marketing to non-profit 
and non-business institutions; e.g., charities, education, or health care; and 2) expansion of 
the responsibili'jes of marketing beyond the personal survival of the individual firm, to include 
the betterment of society as a whole. These two factors are reflected in the official Amer- 
ican Marketing Association definition published in 1988 . 

"Marketing is the process ofplanning and executing the conception, pricing, promo- 
tion, and distribution of ideas, goods, and services to create exchanges that satisfy 
individual (customer) and organiwtional objectives.'" 

While this definition can help us better comprehend the parameters of marketing, it 
does not provide a full picture. Definitions of marketing cannot flesh out specific transac- 
tions and other relationships among these elements. The following propositions are offered 
to supplement this definition and better position marketing within the firm: 

1. The overall directive for any organization is the mission statement or some equiv- 
alent statement of organizational goals. It reflects the inherent business philoso- 
phy of the organization. 

2. Every organization has a set of functional areas (e.g., accounting, production, 
finance, data processing, marketing) in which tasks t;lat are necessary for the suc- 
cess of the organization are performed. These functional areas must be managed 
if they are to achieve maximum performance. 

3. Every functional area is guided by a philosophy (derived from the mission state- 
ment or company goals) that governs its approach toward its ultimate set of tasks. 

4. Marketing differs from the other functional areas in that its primary concern is 
with exchanges that take place in markets, outside the organization (called a 
transaction). 

5. Marketing is most successful when the philosophy, tasks, and manner of imple- 
menting available Lechnology are coordinated and complementary. 

Perhaps an example will clarify these propositions: L.L. Bean is an extremely suc- 
cessful mail order company. The organization bases much of its success on its longstand- 
ing and straightforward mission statement: "Customer Satisfaction: An L.L. Bean 
Tradition" (Proposition 1). The philosophy permeates every level of the organization and 
is reflected in high quality products, fair pricing, convenience, a 100% satisfaction policy 
and-above all-dedication to customer service (Proposition 2). This philosophy has neces- 
sitated a very high standard of production, efficient billing systems, extensive and respon- 
sive communication networks, computerization, innovative cost controls, and so forth. 
Moreover, it has meant that all of these functional areas have to be in constant communi- 
cation, must be totally coordinated, and must exhibit a level of harmony and mutual respect 
that creates a positive environment in order to reach shared goals (Proposition 3). The L.L. 
Bean marketing philosophy is in close harmony with its mission statement. Everything the 
marketing department does must reinforce and make real the abstract concept of "consumer 
satisfaction" (Proposition 4). The price-product-quality relationship must be fair. The prod- 
uct must advertise in media that reflects trus high quality. Consequently, L.L. Bean adver- 



MARKETING: DEFINITION AND JUSTIFICATION 






^^etscape^LLSeonHom^aae 




=» A * & 






F<tr-«fifd 8#kwJ " Horn* Sear* Jteteotpp IffMrgw Print Security Sfwy 



rfctslfoi ^ [jrtlp :/f»w. Ilbwiijceff ^ 



s&Vrbt-Utl jJtCwrtict ^P*aplt ^YUlvvFtftt -^ttowihitf <£ fitf 3h« 



I 

H 



L.LB 



ean 



t> HOME ■> SHOP O CUSTOMER SFHVK£ * OUTDOORS ONLINE 
t m* account o ntrvACr o *nOPk<wd«*T & iWniitf 

start here CO ANYWHERE® X 




gay*«H 



» feds - 

• iwtlMCaftfcMni 

i Tn.,,-1 -V frjrt: ■ 







how at llbojii.com 



ts -d* a eft a ol to %t *d s eJieal - mutv* g«[ ye u tavef *d. 
Our f CTft i J ^ a ' , ° ^ w 

iti<J $500 shopping #r jfid pjfe* - Ju V2 to Sepl^mbe r 23. 



* 




with Subaru to (wtdw«wita™ii»fl 



.MfiL 



3MB-:" 



i^i-j;LJjiL_£_ 



AD 1.1 The website for L.L. Bean represents the newest form of marketing communication, 



tises through its direct-mail catalogue and through print ads in prestigious magazines (e.g. , 
National Geographic). It also has one of the most highly regarded websites (Ad 1. 1). Prod- 
uct selec:ion and design are based upon extensive research indicating the preferences of 
their customers Since product delivery and possible product return is critical, marketing 
must be absolutely sure that both these tasks are performed in accordance with customers' 
wishes (Proposition 5). While one might argue that the marketing function must be the most 
important function at L.L. Bean, this is r.ot the case. L.L. Bean is just as likely to lose a 
customer because of incorrect billing (an accounting function) or a flawed hunting boot (a 
product function) as it is from a misleading ad (a marketing function). 

Admittedly, marketing is often a critical part of a firm's success. Nevertheless, the 
importance of marketing must be kept in perspective. For many large manufacturers such 
as Proctor & Gamble, Microsoft, Toyota, and Sanyo, marketing represents a major expen- 
diture, and these businesses depend on the effectiveness of their marketing effort. Conversely, 
for regulated industries (such as utilities, social services, or medical care or small businesses 
providing a one-of-a-kind product) marketing may be little more than a few informative 
brochures. There are literally thousands of examples of businesses-many quite small- 
that have neither the resources nor the inclination to support an elaborate marketing organ- 
ization and strategy. These businesses rely less on research than on common sense. In all 
these cases, the marketing program is worth the costs only if it fits the organization and 
facilitates its ability to reach its goals. 



6 CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCING MARKETING 

NEWSLINE: PICTURE YOUR MISSION 



Artist Linda Armantrout, owner of Armantrout Graphic Design and 
Illustration, works with businesses to help them picture their goals- 
literally-through a "pictorial mission statement. " 

As op;JOsed to the typical written mission statement that is handed 
down to employees from management. Armantrout creates a bright 
watercolor picture of the statement, after receiving input from both 
employees and managers, The final result is usually a collage of sorts 
that depicts what is important to the staff and the business-such as 
clients, products, services, and ethics. 

The mission statement picture that Armantrout designs is framed 
and hung at the company to remind employees of their goals. The piC- 
torial statements also can be put on coffee mugs, jackets, and desk- 
top posters, or turned into screen savers. 

One of Armantrout's clients, BancOne Leasing Corporation, came 
up with a colorful image of a globe surrounded by images represent- 
ing its clients and services. Drawings of airplanes and buses repre- 
sent what the company leases and the globe represents its national 
presence. 

Sources: Katie Ford. "Picture Your Goals In Color," The Denver Business Jour- 
nal, March 17-18, 1999, pp. 33A, 35A. Shirleen Holt, "Mission Possible," Busi- 
ness Week, August 16. 1999, p. F-12. Teri Lammers, "The Effective and 
Indispensable Mission Statement," Inc., August. 1999, p. 75. 



Justification for Study 

This task of determining the appropriateness of marketing for a particular business or insti- 
tution serves as a major justification for learning about marketing. Although marketing has 
clearly come of age during the decades of the 1970, 1980s, and 1990s, there is still a great 
deal of misunderstanding about the meaning and usefulness of marketing. For most of the 
global public, marketing is still equated with advertising and personal selling. While mar- 
keting is both of those, it is also much more. 

The business community can attrioute a partial explanatior. for this general lack of under- 
standing about marketing to the uneven acceptance and adoption of marketing. Some busi- 
nesses still exist in the dark ages when marketing was defined as "the sales department will 
sell whatever the piant produces." Others have advanced a bit further, in that they have a 
marketing officer and engage in market research, product development, promotion and have 
a long list of marketing activities. More and more businesses firmly believe that the aim of 
marketing is to make selling superfluous, meaning that the marketer knows and understands 
the customer so well that the product or service is already what's wanted and sells itself. 
This does not mean that marketeis ignore the engineering and production of the product or 
the importance of;Jfofits. It does suggest, however, that attention to customers-who they 
are and who they are going to be- is seen to be in the best lOng-tenn interest of the com- 
pany. As a student imerested in business, it is beneficial for you to have an accurate and com- 
plete comprehension of the role marketing can and should play in today's business world. 

There are also several secondary reasons to study marketing. One we have already 
alluded to in our discussion on definitions: The application of marketing to more nonprofit 



MARKETING: DEFINITION AND JUSTIFICATION 7 

and nonbusiness institutions is growing. Churches, museums, the United Way, the U.S. Armed 
Forces, politicians, and others are hiring individuals with marketing expertise. This has opened 
up thousands of new job opportunities for those with a working knowledge of marketing. 
Even if you are not getting a degree in marketing, knowing abou:: marketing will pay 
off in a variety of careers. Consider the following individuals: 

• Paul Moore, an engineer specializing in earth moving equipment, constantly works 
with product development and sales personnel in order to create superior products. 

• Christy Wood, a CPA, is a top tax specialist who spends much of her time main- 
taining customer relationships, and at least three days a month seeking new customers. 

• Steve Jacobson, a systems analyst and expert programmer, understands that his skills 
must be used to find the right combination of hardware and software for every one 
of his customers. 

• Doris Kelly, a personnel manager, must be skilled at finding, hiring, and training 
individuals to facilitate her organization's marketing efforts. 

• Craig Roberts, an ex-Microsoft engineer, has recently started a dot-com company 
and is in the process of raising capital. 

There are two final factors that justify the study of marketing for nearly every citizen. 
First of all, we are all consumers and act:ve participants in the marketing network. Under- 
standing the rudiments of marketing will make us better consumers , which in turn will force 
businesses to do their jobs better. Second, marketing has an impact on society as a whole. 
Concepts such as trade deficit, embargo, devaluation of a foreign currency, price fixing, decep- 
tive advertising, and product safety take on a whole new meaning when we view them in a 
marketing context. This knowledge should make you a more enlightened citizen who under- 
stands what such social and political issues mean to you and to our society. 

Marketing capsules summarize the information throughout this text. 

Characteristics of a Marketing Organization 

As noted earlier, the application of marketing in a particular organization varies tremen- 
dously, ranging from common-sense marketing to marketing departments with thousands 
of staff members and multimilllOn-dollar budgets. Yet both may have a great deal in com- 
mon in respect to how they view the activity called marketing. We refer to these common 
characteristics as the Cs of Marketing. They are your clues that a business understands 
marketing. 



1. 



1. The purpose of marketing is to help find and keep cus- 4. The primary reasons for studying marketing are: 
tomers by creating a competitive advantage. a. It is important to assess the role marketing should play 

2. Marketing, one of severai functions operating in an organ- in the firm. 

ization, is directed by the mission statement of the organ- b. Marketing offers growing career opportunities, 

ization and provides certain tools to reach objectives. c - Marketing enhances our chances of becoming more 

3. The value of marketing must be kept in perspective: it must effective consumers and citizens - 
contribute to the growth of the firm. 



CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCING MARKETING 



Consumer Content 

What makes the existence of any organization possible is that there are a significant num- 
ber of people who need the product or service offered by that organization. As soon as that 
group becomes too small, or the need no longer exists, or some other organization can sat- 
isfy that need better, the organization will be eliminated. That is the way of a free economy. 
Thus, a politician doesn't get re-elected, an inner-city church closes its doors, the money 
needed to cure AIDS is not allocated, and the Vail Ski Resort files for bankruptcy. 

In the case of business organizations, and marketing organization:.: in particular, the 
people with the needs are called consumers or customers. In marketing, the act of obtain- 
ing a desired object from someone by offering something of value in return is called the 
exchange process. Moreover, the exchange between the person with the need (who gives 
money or some other personal resource) and the organization selling this need-satisfying 
thing (a product, service, or idea) is inherently economic, and is called a transaction. There 
tends to be some negotiation between the parties. Individuals on both sides attempt to max- 
imize rewards and minimize costs in their transactions so as to obtain the :'nost profitable 
outcomes. Ideally, all parties achieve a satisfactory level of reward. 

In each transaction, there is an underlying philosophy in respect to how the parties 
perceive the exchange. Sometimes deception and lying permeate the exchange. Other 
exchanges may be characterized as equitable, where each party receives about the same as 
the other-the customer's need is satisfied and the business makes a reasonable profit. With 
the emergence of the Internet and e-comrnerce during the 1990s, the nature of the exchange 
for many businesses and customers has changed dramatically. Today's consumers have access 
to far more and far better information . They also have many more choices. Businesses must 
provide a similar level of information and must deal with new competitors that are quicker, 
smarter, and open 24 hours a day. 

An organization that employs marketing correctly knows that keeping customers 
informed is easier if they keep in constant contact with the customer. This does not neces- 
sarily mean that they write and call regularly, although it could. Rather, it more likely means 
that a marketing organization knows a great deal about the characteristics, values, inter- 
ests, and behaviors of its customers, and monitors how these factors change over time. 
Although the process is not an exact science, there is sufficient evidence that marketers who 
do this well tend to succeed. 

When thii; attempt to know as much about the consumer as possible is coupled with 
a decision to base all marketing on this information, it is said that the organization is consumer- 
oriented or has adopted the marketing concept. 1 1 means working back from the customers ' 
needs, rather than forward from the factory's capabilities. 

Both historically and currently, many businesses do not follow the marketing con- 
cept. Companies such as Texas Instruments and Otis Elevator followed what has been labeled 
a production orientation, where the focus is on technology, innovation, and low produc- 
tion costs. Such companies assume that a technically superior or less expensive product 
sells itself. There are also companies, such as Amway, where sales and marketing are essen- 
tially the same thing. This sales orientation assumes that a good salesperson has the capa- 
bility to sell anything. Often, this focus on the selling process may ignore the consumer of 
view the consumer as someone to be manipulated. Insightful businesses acknowledge the 
importance of production and sales, but realize that a three-step process is most effective: 

(1) continuously collect information about customers' needs and competitors' capabilities; 

(2) share the information across departments; and (3) use the information to create a com- 
petitive advantage by increasing value for customers. This is true marketing. 



MARKETING: DEFINITION AND JUSTIFICATION V 

Company Capabilities 

All marketing organizations try to objectively compare their existing capabilities with their 
ability to meet the consumer's needs now and in the future. Moreover, when deficiencies 
are found, a good marketing organization must be willing to make changes as quickly as 
possible. When Toyota realized that their products were not connecting with consumers aged 
35 and younger, it decided to take direct action. In 1999, it gathered eight people in their 
20s and 30s from around the company into a new, ethnically diverse marketing group called 
"genesis." Their first assignment was to launch three cars meant to pull in younger buyers: 
the entry-level ECHO subcompact, a sporty new two-door Celica, and the MR2 Spyder, a 
racy convertible roadster. 2 

Although assessing company capabilities often begins in the marketing area, all the 
business functions must be assessed. Do we have the technical know-how to produce a com- 
petitive product? Do we have the plant capacity? Do we have the necessary capital? Do we 
have good top management? A "no" to any of these questions may stymie the marketing 
effort. Conversely, a strong advantage in cost control or dynamic leadership may provide 
the company with a competitive marketing advantage that has little to do with marketing, 
but everything to do with the business succeeding. 

Communication 

Few doubt that the secret of success in any relationship is communication. This is espe- 
cially true in a marketing relationship, where the attitude of both parties is frequently skep- 
tical, the nature of the contact is hardly intimate, and the message delivery system tends to 
be impersonal and imprecise. It's because of these factors that communication plays such 
an important role in a marketing organization. 

Marketers know that consumers are constantly picking up cues put out by the organ- 
ization, or about the organization, that they use to form attitudes and beliefs about the organ- 
ization. Many of these message-laden cues are controlled by the organization, including 
factors such as product design, product quality, price, packaging, outlet selection, adver- 
tising, and the availability of coupons. In this case, marketers follow basic communication 
principles that are discussed throughout this book. Most notably, there is a constant attempt 
to make sure that all of these elements deliver a consistent message, and that this message 
is understood and interpreted in the same way by the various consumers. 

On the other hand, there are many message-laden cues that are not under the control 
of the marketer, yet may be more powerful in the minds of consumers, and that must be 
anticipated and dealt with by the marketers. A recent report that United Air Lines had the 
worst customer satisfaction scores created a downturn i n both United's stock and customer 
reservations. Although there are many sources delivering such information, the three most 
prominent are employees, competitors, and the media. 

Employees, from the president on down, are all considered representatives of the organ- 
ization for which they work. Consumers often assume that the behavior, language, or dress 
of an employee is an accurate reflection of the entire organization. Making employees- 
and possibly even former employees-positive ambassadors of the organization has become 
so important that a new term has emerged-internal marketing. 

Competitors say a great deal about one another, some truths, some boldface lies. A 
marketing organization must be cognizant of this possibility and be prepared to respond. The 
automobile industry has used comparison messaging for over thirty years. Coke and Pepsi 
have been attacking and counter-attacking for about the same length of time. Negative polit- 
ical messages appear to be very effective, even though few politicians admit to the strategy. 



1 CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCING MARKETING 



Finally, the media (editors and reporters working for newspapers, TV and radio sta- 
tions, and magazines) looms as one of the greatest communication hurdles faced by mar- 
keters, In a large marketing organization, the responsibility of communicating with the media 
is assigned to a public relations staff Public relations people write press release stories about 
their organization that they hope the media will use, If the press releases are not used, the 
marketer attempts to ensure that whatever the media says about the organization is accu- 
rate and as complementary as possible. For smaller companies, dealing with the media 
becomes everyone's responsibility, Many businesses now face a new media, the Internet: 
chat rooms, websites, and propaganda campaigns intended to destroy a business have become 
commonplace, Companies that are willing to focus on communication as a means of doing 
business engage in relationship marketing-a type of marketing that builds long-standing 
positive relationships with customers and other important stakeholder groups, Relationship 
marketing identifies "high value" customers and prospects and bonds them to the brand 
through personal attention, 

Competition 

We have already mentioned the importance that competition plays in a marketing organi- 
zation, At a minimum, marketing companies must thoroughly understand their competi- 
tors' strengths and weaknesses. This means more than making sweeping generalizations 
about the competitors. It means basing irtelligent marketing decisions on facts about how 
competitors operate and determining how best to respond. 

Often the identificatior. of competitors is fairly straightforward. It is the supermar- 
ket on the next block, or the three other companies that manufacture replacement wind- 
shields. There are instances, however, when the identification of a competitor is not clear. 
Marketing expert iheodore Levitt coined the term "marketing myopia" several years ago 
to describe companies that mis-identify their competition, 3 Levitt argued, for example, that 
the mistake made by the passenger train industry was to restrict their competition to other 
railroads instead of all mass transit transportat;on alternatives, including automobiles, air- 
lines, and buses, Today we see the same mistake being made by companies in the enter- 
tainment industry (movie theaters, restaurants, and resorts), who assume that their only 
competition is like-titled organizations. 

Since practically no marketer operates as a monopoly, most of the strategy issues con- 
sidered by a marketer relate to competition, Visualize a marketing strategy as a huge chess 
game where one player is constantly making his or her moves contingent on what the other 
player does. Some partners, like Coke and Pepsi, McDonald's and Burger King, and Ford 
and General Motors, have been playing the game so long that a stalemate is often the result. 
In fact, the relative market share owned by Coke and Pepsi hasn't changed by more than a 
percentage or two despite the billions of dollars spent by each on marketing, 

The desire of companies to accurately gauge competitors has led to the growing pop- 
ularity of a separate discipline-competitive intelligence, This field involves gathering as 
much information about competitors through any means possible, usually short of break- 
ing the law, More is said about this process in the Integrated Marketing (1M) box that follows, 

Cross-Functional Contact 

One of the first mistakes an organization might make is to allow the various functional areas 
to become proprietary, Whenever a marketing department considers itself most important 
to the success of the organization and self-sufficient without need for accounting, manu- 
facturing, or human resources, it ceases to be a reliable marketing group, True marketers 
know that they cannot be any better than their weakest link. Lack of understanding and trust 
between marketing and manufacturing, for instance, could mean that a product sold by mar- 



MARKETING: DEFINITION AND JUSTIFICATION 



11 



keting is not delivered when promised or with the right features. Marketers should con- 
sider their peers in engineering, who rnjght not be able to produce an ambitious product 
requested by marketing at the cost desired. Likewise, human resources might not be able 
to locate the individ'lal "with ten years of experience in package goods marketing" requested 
by the marketing manager. 

The point is that marketing is far more likely to be successful if its staff relate intel- 
ligently and honestly with members of the other functional areas. In some organizations, 
the walls of parochialism have been standing so long that tearing them down is almost impos- 
sible. Nevertheless, creating inter-departmenta: connections is critical. 

With downsizing and other cost-cutting activities prevalent during the last decade, 
the need for inter-related and harmonious business functions has become even more impor- 
tant. In the field of marketing, the term integrated marketing has been coined, suggesting 
that individuals working in traditional marketing departments are no longer specialists, but 
must become knowledgeable about all the elements of the business that currently or poten- 
tially have an impact on the success of marketing. At the corporate level, all managers should 
share a corporate vision, and there should be an organizational structure that makes it pos- 
sible for departments or divisions to share information and participate in joint planning. 

This approach represents the direction in which many companies are moving, includ- 
ing giants like Kraft and Disney. To be truly integrated, though, every decision at each level 
of the business should support decisions made at all the other levels. To illustrate, let's say 
that the corporate goal is to maximize profit. A marketing plan objective to increase sales 
by marketing new products matches the goal. The previous 1M box also illustrates this point. 

Community Contact 

Most marketers are curious; they enjoy observing and noting what's happening in their com- 
munity. Although the word "community" usually denotes a city, town, or neighborhood, 
we use the word here in a much broader sense. "Community" refers to the environment in 



SPYING TO STAY COMPETITIVE 



Most corporate detectives avoid terms like spying and espi- 
onage, preferring the more dignified label "competitive intel- 
ligence," but whatever they call it, snooping on business rivals 
has become an entrenched sub-industry. 

Nearly every large U.S. company has an intelligence office 
of some kind. Some, like Motorola, Inc., have units sprinkled 
in almost all of their outposts around the world. Their assign- 
ment is to monitor rivals, sniff out mergers or new technolo- 
gies that might affect the bottom line, even to keep tabs on 
morale at client companies. A veteran of the Central Intelli- 
gence Agency formed Motorola's intelligence unit, viewed 
as a model in the business, in 1982. 

Corporate intelligence relies on a slew of tools-some 
sophisticated, many quite basic. On the simpler end of the 



spectrum, business sleuths do everything from prowling trade- 
show floors to combing through rivals' web sites and patent 
office filings. They keep their ears open in airports and aboard 
flights. But sometimes they go further. They take photographs 
of competitive factories, and, increasingly, they rely on new 
data-mining software that permits them to scan the Internet 
at high speeds for snippets about their rivals. 

Sources: Neil King, Jr. and Jess Bravin, "Call It Mission Impossi- 
ble Inc. -Corporate Spying Firms Thrive," The Wall Street Jour- 
nal, Monday, July 3, 2000, pp. Bl, B4; Norm Brodsky, "The First 
Step," Inc., August, 2000, pp. 37-38; "Spy Practice," Sunday 
Times (London), July 23, 2000, p. 89; "Competitive Intelligence is 
Not COIporate Espionage;' Financial News, June 30, 2000, p. A6. 



1 2 CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCING MARKETING 



which the marketer operates. For Esther and Jim Williams, who operate an A&W drive-in 
in Mattoon, Illinois, community is quite small. For Verizon Communication, community 
encompasses practically the entire world, extending even to outer space. 

Regardless of the scope of the marketer's community, maintaining contact with it is 
essential. Contact could mean reading the local newspaper and listening to the local gossip. 
Or it could mean subscribing to information releases of several marketing research firms 
that monitor world events 24 hours a day. every day Either might do the job, although the 
differences in financial costs would be great. In Chapter 3 we discuss some of the more 
important trends in the world community. Esther and jim would find this discussion inter- 
esting, but not very useful. 

U:timately, to be considered a responsible citizen in the environments in which it oper- 
ates, marketers have the ongoing task of engaging in only pro-societal activities and con- 
ducting business in an ethical manner. There are many marKeting companies that donate 
millions of dollars or land to communities, clean lakes and rivers, revamp deteriorating neigh- 
borhoods, give free product to the needy, manage recycling activities, and so forth. There 
is no doubt that the need for marketing to continue such activities will increase. 

The Role of Marketing in the Firm: 
A Basis for Classification 

Marketing is an individualized ano highly creative process. Despite the availability of high- 
powered compulers and sophisticated software capable of analyzing massive amounts of 
data, marketing is still more of an art rather than a science. Each business must customize 
its marketing efforts in response to its environment and the exchange process. Consequently, 
no two marketing strategies are exactly the same. 

This requirement of marketing to play slightly different roles, depending upon some 
set of situational criteria, has in turn provided us with a division of marketing into a num- 
ber of different categories This is not to imply, however, that there aren't general market- 
ing principles that work in most businesses-there are. There is a right and wrong way to 
design a package. There are certain advertising strategies that tend to work more often than 
others. Rather, we are saying that because of certain factors, a business's approach toward 
marketing and the ensuing strategy will require some modification from the basic plan. 

Shown in Table 1.1 arc the most common types of marketing categories. Since these 
various types O/marketing will be discussed throughout this text, a brief introduction is 
provided at this point. 

Macromarketing Versus Micromarketing 

The division of marketing into macromarketing and micromarketing is a fairly recent one. 
Initially, the division was a result of the controversy concerning the responsibility of mar- 
keting. Should marketing be limited to the success of the individual firm, or should mar- 
keting consider the economic welfare of a whole society? Accepting the later, or "macro," 
point of view dramatically changes the way marketing is carried out. In this light, every 
marketing decision must be evaluated with regard to how it might positively or negatively 
affect each person and institution operating in that society. In 1982, Bunt and Burnett sur- 
veyed the academic community in order to define more precisely the distinction between 
macro- and mircomarketing. 4 Their findings suggest that the separation depends upon "what 
is being studied," "whether it is being viewed from the perspective of society or the firm," 
and "who receives the consequences of the activity." Examples of macromarketing activi- 
ties are studying the marketing systems of different nations, the consequences on society 
of certain marketing actions, and the impact of certain technologies on the marketing trans- 



MARKETING: DEFINITION AND JUSTIFICATION 



13 




It^l the face of Charles Dubin-choir singer, moviegoer and 

retired TV director. Four years ago, Charles had -a funny 
deling in his. chest." When Charles heard the wtmjtf "heart 
■JiMCiSs"" from his tl<Klor, he feared losing his inJcptlkierKt; 
and his ability to CHjOy life fully. But. thank to effective 
medicines, today he's enjoying an active rcfircnwtu. And, 
with hisnewhealither lifestyle. Charles is also doing /i/spart 
to keep his heart in shape. Heart disease is the leading cau& 
tl( death among Americans. But in the last .30 years, modern 

America's Pharmaceutical Companies 

Leading the way in the search (or cures 



medicines have helped reduce the number of Jeathsby half. 

New medicines a re ;lsc ItclfiUtg to keep more patientsout of 
the hospital by controlling liigh'risk coitdukHi!. thai lead to 
heart <|isc;i«f, such as high blood pfcastifc and high cholesterol. 
Pharmaceutical company researchers are working hard to 
discover breakthrough* that will help make many illness , 
andjiscjiesa ihin^ofthe past andlmng more potent* I16W 
hope for a better tomorrow. $o, mof€ people liki' Charles 
can get on wilh living and g o on with the 5-Ikhy. 



AD 1.2 The pharmaceutical ;ndustry tries to maintain contact with consumers. 



action. The use of scanners in supermarkets and automatic teller machines in banking illus- 
trates the last example. Micromarketing examples include determining how Nikon Steel 
should segment its market, recommending how National Jewish Hospital should price their 
products, and evaluating the success of the "Just Say No" anti-drug campaign. 



Service Marketing Versus Goods Marketing 

The distinction between services and goods products is not always clear-cuL In general, 
service products tend to be intangible, are often consumed as they are produced, are difficult 



1 4 CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCING MARKETING 




AD 1.3 Hot dogs are goods products and, as such, are marketed differently. 



to standardize because they require human labor, and may require the customer to partic- 
ipate in the creation of the service product. 

Goods products tend to be just the opposite in terms of these criteria. Consequently, 
marketers of service products usually employ a marketing strategy quite different from that 
of goods marketers. For example, a local family physician creates tangibility by oroviding 
an environment, waiting room, examination rooms, diplomas on the walls, that convinces 
patients that they are receiving good health care. Conversely, coffee producers create iiltan- 
gibility in order to appear different from competitors. This is done through colorful pack- 



MARKETING: DEFINITION AND JUSTIFICATION 



15 



TABLE 1.1 Kinds of Marketing 



CLASSIFICATION 



EXAMPLE 



FACTORS 



Macromarketing 
Micromarketing 



The devaluation of the yen 
A pricing strategy for 
Wal-Mart 



Emphasis of study 
Perspective, receiver of 
consequences 



Goods marketing 
Service marketing 



Nabisco International 
Chase Manhattan Bank 



Tangibility, standardization, 
storage, production, 
involvement 



For-profit marketing 
Nonprofit marketing 



Otis Elevator 

New York Museum of Art 



Concerns for profits 
Tax status 



Mass marketing 
Direct marketing 
Internet marketing 



Sony 

Time magazine 
trip.com 



Nature of contact, 
information, 
process for purchasing 
and delivery 



Local marketing 
Regional marketing 
National marketing 
International marketing 
Global marketing 



Imperial Garden Restaurant 
Olympia Brewery 
American Red Cross 
Ford Motor Company 
Owest 



Proximity of customers, 
geographic area, 
extent of distribution, 
network, marketing 
variation commitment to 
country 



Consumer goods marketing Kraft Foods 

Business-to-business IBM 

marketing 



Nature of customer 
Product function 



aging and advertisements showing people who are successful because they start each day 
with a cup or two or ten of Starbuck's coffee. 

For-profit Marketing Versus Nonprofit Marketing 

As the terms connote, the difference between for-profit and nonprofit marketing is in their pri- 
mary objective. For-profit marketers measure success in terms of profitability and their abil- 
ity to pay dividends or pay back loans. Continued existence is contingent upon level of profits. 
Nonprofit institutions exist to benefit a society, regardless of whether profits are 
achieved. Because of the implicit objectives assigned to nonprofits, they are subject to an 
entirely different additional set of laws, notably tax laws. While they are allowed to gen- 
erate profits, they must use these monies in specific ways in order to maintain their non- 
prufit status. There are several other factors that require adjustments to be made in the 
marketing strategies for nonprofits. 

Mass Marketing, Direct Marketing, and 
Internet Marketing 

Mass marketing is distinguished from direct marketing in terms of the distance between 
the manufacturer and the ultimate user of the product. Mass marketing is characterized as 
having wide separation and indirect communication. A mass marketer, such as Nike, has 



16 



CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCING MARKETING 



very little direct contact with its customers and must distribute its product through various 
retail outlets alongside its competitors. Communication is impersonal, as evidenced by its 
national television and print advertising campaigns, couponing, and point-of-purchase dis- 
plays. The success of mass marketing is contingent on the probability that within the huge 
audience exposed to the marketing strategy., there exist sufficient potential customers inter- 
ested in the product to make *he strategy worthwhile. 

Direct marketing establishes a somewhat personal relationship with the customer by 
first allowing the customer to purchase the product directly from the manufacturer and then 
communicating with the customer on a first-name basis. This type of marketing is experi- 
encing tremendous growth. Apparently, marketers have tired of the waste associated with 
mass IParketing and customers want more personal attention. Also, modem mechanisms 
for collecting and processing accurate mailing lists have greatly increased the effectiveness 
of direct marketing. Catalogue companies (Spiegel, J.e. Penney), telecommunications com- 
panies (Sprint), and direct mail companies (Publishers Clearing House) are example of direct 
marketers. A modified type of direct marketing is represented by companies that allow 
ordeling of product by calling a toll-free number or mailing in an order card as part of an 
advertisement. 

Although (officially), Internet marketing is a type of direct marketing, it has evolved 
so quickly and demanded the attention of so many companies that a separate section here 
is 'varranted. Essentially, Internet technology (which changes by the moment) has created 
a new way of doing business. In the Internet age, the way consumers evaluate and follow 
through on their purchase decisions has changed significantly. "Call now!" is no longer an 
effective pitch. Consumers have control over how, when, and where they shop on the Inter- 



iNetscipe: SprmtlBusinessM 



: *t a a .-a <* & & at £ & 




AD 1.4 An example of Internet marketing. 



MARKETING: DEFINITION AND JUSTIFICATION 1 7 

net. The Internet has all but eliminated the urgency of satisfying the need when the oppor- 
tunity is presented. Internet marketing will be discussed in detail in a later chapter. 

Local, Regional, National, International, and 
Global Marketers 

As one would expect, the size and location of a company's market varies greatly. Local 
marketers are concerned with customers that tend to be clustered tightly around the mar- 
keter. The marketer is able to learn a great deal about the customer and make necessary 
changes quickly. Naturally, the total potential market is limited. There is also the possibil- 
ity that a new competitor or environmental factor will put a local marketer out of business. 

Regional marketers cover a larger geographic area that may necessitate multiple pro- 
duction plants and a more complex distribution network. While regional marketers tend to 
serve adjoining cities, parts of states, or entire states, dramatic differences in demand may 
still exist, requiring extensive adjustments in marketing strategy. 

National marketers distribute their product throughout a country. This may involve 
multiple manufacturing plants, a distribution system including warehouses and privately 
owned delivery vehicles, and different versions of the marketing "mix" or overall strategy. 
This type of marketing offers tremendous profit potential, but also exposes the marketer to 
new, aggressive competitors. 

International marketers operate in more than one country. As will become clear later 
in this book, massive adjustments are normally made in the marketing mix in various coun- 
tries. Legal and cultural differences alone can greatly affect a strategy's outcome. As the 
U.S. market becomes more and more saturated with U.S. -made products, the continued expan- 
sion into foreign markets appears inevitable. 

Global marketing differs from international marketing in some very definite ways. 
Whereas international marketing means a company sells its goods or services in another 
country, it does not necessarily mean that the company has made any further commitments. 
Usually the product is still manufactured in the home country, sold by their people, and the 
profits are taken back to that country. In the case of Honda Motors, for example, it means 
building manufacturing plants in the U.S., hiring local employees, using local distribution 
systems and advertising agencies, and reinvesting a large percentage of the profits back into ' 
the U.S. 

Consumer Goods Marketing and Business-to-Business 
(Industrial) Marketing 

Consumer goods marketers sell to individuals who consume the finished product. Business- 
to-business marketers sell to other businesses or institutions that consume the product in 
turn as part of operating the business, or use the product in the assembly of the final prod- 
uct they sell to consumers. Business-to-business marketers engage in more personal sell- 
ing rather than mass advertising and are willing to make extensive adjustments in factors 
such as the selling price, product features, terms of delivery, and so forth. 

For the consumer goods marketer, the various marketing components are relatively 
fixed. I n addition, consumer goods marketers might employ emotional appeals and are faced 
with the constant battle of getting their product into retail outlets. 

Strategic Components of Marketing 

A necessary and useful starting point for the study of marketing is consideration of the man- 
agement process. The management of marketing serves as the framework for the process 
of marketing. Marketing management also serves as a central link between marketing and 



1 8 CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCING MARKETING 



the societal level and everyday consumption by the general public. Although there are many 
variations of the marketing process, the one shown in Figure 1.1 will be employed in this 
book. Our process begins with corporate-level considerations, which dictate the direction 
the entire organization will take. The three corporate-level considerations listed here (mis- 
sion, objectives, and strategy) are more precisely basic management topics, but are addressed 
in passing in the following sections. 

Functional-Level Considerations 

I f a marketing firm is to adopt the customer-centered orientation discussed earlier, it must 
also extend this philosophy to the other functions/institutions with which it must interact. 
These functions, and the institutions that perform the functions, can be categorized as non- 
marketing institutions and marketing institutions. 

Nonmarketing institutions can exist within the organization or outside the organiza- 
tion. The former inciude accounting, financial planning, human resources, engineering, man- 
ufacturing, research and development, and so on. Marketing must be familia; with the 
capabilities of each of these functions and plan accordingly. Establishing and maintaining 
rapport with leaders in these other functional areas is a challenge for every marketer. Non- 
marketing institutions outside the firm facilitated the marketing process by providing experl- 
ise in areas not directly related to marketing. Examples include financial institutions that 
lend marketers necessary funds ; regulatory institutions that pass laws to allow marketers 
to perform an activity; and the press, which tells the public about the activities of the marketer. 

The Marketing Plan 

To a great extent, the same sequence of activities performed at the corporate level is repeated 
at the marketing level. The primary difference is that the marketing plan is directly influ- 
enced by the corporate plan as well as tne role of the other functions within the organiza- 
tion. Consequently, the marketing plan must always involve monitoring and reacting to 
changes in the corporate plan. 

Apart from this need to be flexible to accommodate the corporate plan, the market- 
ing plan follows a fairly standardized sequence . The marketing plan begins with a mission. 
A mission reflects the general values of the organization. What does it stand for? How does 
it define integrity? How does it view the people it serves? Every organization has an explicit 



The characteristics of a marketing organization include: 6. Attempts at familiarity with the community 

1. Maintenance of contact with consumers The types of marketing: 

2. Objective comparison of existing capabilities with ability , .„ , .. , , .. 

J l b r J 1. Macromarketing and rnicromarketmg 

to meet present and future consumer needs 



3. Maintenance of a consistent message from all marketing 
elements to all consumer groups 



2. Service marketing and goods marketing 

3. For-profit marketing and nonprofit marketing 

4. Mass marketing, direct marketing, and Internet marketing 



4. Thorough understanding of strenglhs and weaknesses of 
competitors ^ - L° ca f regional, national, and international marketing 

5. Understanding of the capabilities of other nonmarketing 6 - Consumer goods marketing and business-to-business 
functions marketing 



MARKETING: DEFINITION AND JUSTIFICATION 



19 



Corporate -I eve I 

considerations 



Mission 
Objectives 



1 Strategy 



Functional-level 
considerations 



Non-marketing 
functions 



Financial 
planning 



Human 
resources 



R&D 



Manufacturing 



FIGURE 1.1 The marketing process 



Marketing 

functions 



Marketing 
plan 



Mission 

Situation 
analysis 

Objectives 

Strategy 

Implementation 

Budgeting 

Evaluation 



or implicit mission. The corporate mission might contain words such as "quality," "global," 
"profitability," and "sacrifice." The marketing-level mission should extend the corporate mis- 
sion by translating the latter into a marketing context. For example, a corporate mission 
that focuses on technology might be accompanied by a production-oriented marketing mis- 
sion. A corporation that stresses stockholders/dividends may result in a sales-orientation in 
marketing. A corporate mission that concentrates on value or quality reflects a consumer- 
oriented marketing mission. Once the mission is established, the situation analysis follows. 

A marketing plan's situation analysis identifies factors, behaviors, and trends that have 
a direct bearing on the marketing plan. Much of this informatior. is usually collected simul- 
taneously with the corporate information. However, collecting information about potential 
and actual customers tends to be the concern of marketers. This is an ongoing activity and 
represents a great deal of the marketer's time and money. (Chapter 2 describes the process 
of marketing research.) 

The situation analysis helps produce a relevant set of marketing objectives. At the 
corporate level, typical objectives include profitability, cost savings, growth, market share 
improvement, risk containment, reputation, and so on. All these corporate objectives can 
imply specific marketing objectives. "Introducing a certain number of new products usu- 
ally" may lead marketers to profitability, increased market share, and movement into new 
markets. Desire to increase profit margins might dictate level of product innovation, qual- 
ity of materials, and price charged. 

The Marketing Mix 

Once the objectives are established, the marketer must decide how to achieve these objec- 
tives. This produces a set of general strategies that must be refined into actionable and achiev- 
able activities. The marketing mix-product, price, promotion, and distribution-represents 



20 CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCING MARKETING 



the way in which an organization's broad marketing strategies are translated into market- 
ing programs for action. 

Product Products (and services)-the primary marketing mix element that satis- 
fied customer wants and needs-provide the main link between the organization and its 
customers. Marketing organizations must be ready to alter products as dictated by changes 
in competitive strategies or changes in other elements of the organization's environment. 
Many organizations have a vast array of products in their mix. Ideally, each of the prod- 
ucts is profitable. But this is often not the case, so some tough decisions must be made con- 
cerning the length of time an unsuccessful product is kept on the market. 

Distribution The organization's distribution system moves the product to the final 
consumer. Because there are many alternatives when selecting a distribution channel, mar- 
keting management must have a clear understanding of the types of distributors, of the trends 
influencing those distributors, and of how those distributors are perceived by customers. 

Communication (Promotion) The product's benefits must be communicated to the 
distributors and to the final customers. Therefore, the marketing organization must provide 
marketing information that is received favorably by distributors and final customers. Mar- 
keting organizations, through promotion, provide information by way of advertising, sales 
promotions, salespeople, public relations, and packaging. 

Price Fi'lally, marketers must price their products in such a way that customers believe 
they are receiving fair value. Price is the primary means by which customers judge the attrac- 
tiveness of a product or service. Moreover, price is a reflection of all the activities of an 
organization. Finally, price is a competitive tool, in that it is used as a basis for compari- 
son of product and perceived value across different organizations. 

Decisions about the marketing mix variables are interrelated. Each of the marketing 
mix variables must be coordinated with the other elements of the marketing program. Con- 
sider, for a moment, a situation in which a firm has two product alternatives (deluxe and 
economy), two price alternatives ($6 and $3), two promotion alternatives (advertising and 
couponing), and two distribution alternatives (department stores and specialty stores). Taken 
together, the firm has a total of 16 possible marketing mix combinations. Naturally, some 
of these appear to be in conflict, such as the "deluxe" product/low price combination. Nev- 
ertheless, the organization must consider many of the possible alternative marketing pro- 
grams. The problem is magnified by the existence of competitors. The organization must 
find H16 right combination of product, price, promotion, and distribution so that it can gain 
a differential advantage over its competitors. (All the marketing mix elements will be dis- 
cussed in more detail in later chapters of this book.) 

Even a well-designed marketing program that has been through a thorough evalua- 
tion of alternatives will fail if its implementation is poor. Implementation involves such things 
as determining where to promote the product, getting the product to the ultimate consumer, 
putting a price on the product, and setting a commission rate for the salespeople. Once a 
decision is nade, a marketing manager must decide how to best implement the terms of 
the plan. 

Scandinavian Airlines (SAS) provides a good example of an organization that has suc- 
cessfully implemented their marketing strategy. SAS had good on-time performance, a good 
safety record and many services designed to make flying easier for its customers. How- 



MARKETING: DEFINITION AND JUSTIFICATION 21 

ever, these were not enough to improve SAS revenue. Other things had to be done to attract 
business-class customers. The approach taken by SAS was largely symbolic in nature. They 
put everyone who bought a full-price ticket in "Euroclass," entitling them to use a special 
boarding card, an executive waiting lounge, designer steel cutlery, and a small napkin clip 
that could be taken as a collector's item. These and other values were provided at no extra 
cost to the customer. The approach was very successful; business class passengers flocked 
to SAS, since they appreciated the perceived increase in value for the price of a ticket. 

The Budget 

Marketing mix components must be evaluated as part of an overall marketing strategy. There- 
fore, the organization must establish a marketing budget based on the required marketing 
effort to influence consumers. The marketing budget represents a plan to aaocate expen- 
ditures to each of the components of the marketing mix. For example, the firm must estab- 
lish an advertising budget as part of the marketing budget and allocate expenditures to various 
types of advertising media-television, newspapers, magazines. A sales promotion budget 
should also be determined, allocating money for coupons, product samples, and traue 
promotions. Similarly, budgets are required for personal selling, distribution, and product 
development. 

How much should be spent? Consider the following example. A common question 
that marketers frequently ask is, "Are we spending enough (or too much) to promote the 
sale of our products?" A reasonable answer would revolve around another consideration: 
"What do we want to accomplish? What are our goals?" The discussion should next turn 
to the methods for achievement of goals and the removal of obstacles to these goals. This 
step is often skipped or avoided. 

Usually, when the question is asked, "Are we spending enough?" an automatic answer 
is given, in terms of what others spend. Knowing what others in the same industry spend 
can be important to an organization whose performance lags behind the competition or to 
an organization that suspects that its expenditures are higher than they need to be. But gen- 
erally, knowing what others spend leads to an unproductive "keeping-up-with-the-Joneses" 
attitude, it also assumes that the others know what they are doing. 

Evaluating Results 

No marketing program is planned and implemented pelfectly. Marketing managers will tell 
you that they experience many surprises during the course of their activities. In an effOlt 
to ensure that performance goes accOfding to plans, marketing managers establish controls 
that allow marketers to evaluate results and identify needs for modifications in marketing 
strategies and programs. Surprises occur, but marketing managers who have established sound 
control procedures can react to surprises quickly and effectively. 

Marketing control involves a number of decisions. One decision is what functions to 
monitor. Some organizations monitor their entire marketing program, while others choose 
to monitor only a part of it, such as their sales force or their advertising program. A sec- 
ond set of decisions concerns the establishment of standards for perfolmance; e.g., market 
share, profitability, or sales. A third set of decisions concerns how to collect infOlmation 
for making comparisons between actual performance and standards. Finally, to the extent 
that discrepancies exist between actual and planned performance, adjustments in the mar- 
keting program or the strategic plan must be made. 

Once a plan is put into action, a marketing manager must still gather information related 
to the effectiveness with which the plan was implemented. Information on sales, profits, 
reactions of consumers, and reactions of competitors must be collected and analyzed so 
that a marketing manager can identify new problems and opportunities. 



22 CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCING MARKETING 

KEYSTO MARKETING SUCCESS 



A prime guideline for marketing success is to realize that establishing customer satisfac- 
tion should be the company's number-one priority. The only people who really know what 
customers want are the customers themselves. A company that realizes this will develop a 
marketing mentality that facilitates information gathering and maintains effective commu- 
nication with the primary reason for the company's existence: the customer. 

A second guideline is to establish a company image that clearly reflects the values 
and aspirations of the company to employees, customers, intermediaries, and the general 
public . Philips Petroleum has done this for years with their advertising campaign that focuses 
on how their company benefits society. 

Third, while marketing requires work that is clearly distinct from other business activ- 
ities, it shOUld be central to the entire organization. Marketing is the aspect of the business 
that customers see. If they see something they do not like, they look elsewhere. 

Fourth, the business should develop a unique strategy that is consistent with the cir- 
cumstances that it faces. The marketer must adapt basic marketing principles to the unique 
product being sold. This means that what General Foods does may not work for GTE because 
one is inherently a goods product and the other a service product. And neither will work 
for the State of Kentucky 's Parks and Recreation Department, because that is a public, non- 
profit organization. In other words, imitating what other organizations do without fully under- 
standing one's own situation is a dangerous strategy. 

Finally, technological progress dictates how marketing will be performed in the future. 
Because of computer technology inventiveness, both consumers and businesses are better 
informed. Knowledge is the most important competitive advantage. The world is one mar- 
ket, and information is changing at light-speed. 



1. The components of marketing management are as follows: 2. The keys to marketing success are: 

a. Corporate-level considerations include the organiza- a. Satisfy the customer. 

tion's mission and objectives. b. Establish a clear company unage. 

b. Functional-level considerations include nonmarketing c. Make marketing central to the organization, 
institutions and marketing institutions. d. Be proactive. 

c. Marketing-level considerations include the mission, the e. Develop a strategy consistent with the situation, 
situation analysis, objectives, strategy, implementation, 

budget, and evaluation. 

d. The marketing mix includes the primary tools available 
to the marketer: product, distribution, promotion, and 
price. 




THE WALL STREET JOURNAL 



IN PRACTICE 

Marketing plays a critical role in the 
success of business organizations: it 
helps them create a competitive 
advantage. By continuously collect- 
ing information about customers' 
needs and competitors' capabilities 
and by sharing this information 
across departments, business organi- 
zations can create a competitive 
advantage by increasing value for 
customers. 

Individuals working in market- 
ing departments must be knowl- 
edgeable about all the elements of 
the business that impact the success 
of marketing efforts. Marketing 
objectives are directed by an orga- 
nization's mission statement, and 
marketers use a set of strategies to 
achieve these objectives. 

Implementation is critical to a 
marketing plan's success; therefore, 
the marketing budget allocates 
expenditures for each of the compo- 
nents of the marketing mix. Market- 
ing success depends on several 
factors, the most important of which 
is establishing customer satisfaction 
as the #1 priority. 

TAKE A TOUR 

The Front Section of the Interactive 
Journal (wsj .com) is similar to the 
front page of the newspaper version 
of The Wall Street Journal. The left 
column displays the menu selection, 
with the five major sections listed at 
the top. These five sections are: 

1. Front Section 

2. Marketplace 

3. Money & Investing 

4. Tech Center 

5. Personal Journal 

The menu remains on the page as 
you navigate through the site, allow- 



ing you to return to the Front Sec- 
tion at any time. 

Articles related to marketing 
are typically found in the Market- 
place section. Click on Marketplace 
now to view today's articles. Just 
below the main menu on the left 
side, a smaller menu titled In this 
Section .. . appears, listing main 
header topics in Marketplace. One 
of the topics is MarketinglMedia. 
Visit this section now to read 
today's articles. 

Chapter I , Introducing Market- 
ing, provides and overview of the 
importance and functions of mar- 
keting in business organizations. 
Marketing takes many forms, and 
evolves with new technologies. Mar- 
keting on the Internet, also known 
as e-commerce marketing, provides 
challenges and opportunities for 
marketers. Visit Volkswagen's web- 
site, WWW.vw.com. to see how the 
company has extended its market- 
ing efforts from television and print 
to its website. 

DELIVERABLE 

Search the Interactive Journal for 
articles about e-commerce market- 
ing. Under Journal Atlas, click on 
Search to conduct a search using 
key words like e-commerce. Inter- 
net, and marketing. Use the Busi- 
ness Index feature to search for 
articles on specific companies. 
Search the Business Index now to 
find articles on Volkswagen. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 

1. Some marketers believe the 
Internet will become the most 
effective avenue for marketing 
products to consumers. Do you 
agree or disagree? 



2. Recently, the effectiveness of 
online marketing efforts has 
been questioned. What can mar- 
keters do to measure the suc- 
cess of online marketing? 

3. What advantages does receiving 
the Wall Street Journal online 
provide for users? Specifically, 
marketers? 



23 



24 CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCING MARKETING 

SUMMARY 



This introductory chapter described marketing as one of the major strategic tools available to the busi- 
ness organization. It began with a basic definition and expanded to a set of propositions of market- 
ing. Simply, marketing is based on the mission statement of the organization; is dependent on the 
effective management of other functional areas; contains afunctional area guided hy its own philos- 
ophy; is the functional area that is concerned with market exchanges: and is likely to be successful 
when the philosophy, tasks, and manner of implementing available technology are coordinated and 
complimentary. 

The chapter also discussed several characteristics shared by organizations that cOlTectly imple- 
ment marketing. Referred to as the Cs of marketing, they include consumer contact, company capa- 
bilities, communication, cross-functional contact, and community contact. Companies share these 
characteristics; the following factors divide marketing into specific types: macromarketing and micro- 
marketing; services and goods marketing; for-profit and nonprofit marketing; mass and direct marketing: 
local, regional, national, and international marketing; and consumer goods and business- to-business 
marketing. 

The chapter concluded with a discussion of the four levels of strategic management with con- 
siderations applicable to marketing: corporate functional, marketing, and marketing mix. 



MARKETER'S VOCABULARY 



Marketing The process of planning and executing the conception, pricing, and distribution of ideas, 
goods, and services to create exchanges that satisfy individual and organizational objectives. 

Consumer/customers Individuals who have needs/wants that can be satisfied by the marketer's 
product or service. 

Transaction An exchange between the person with the need and the organization selling the 
need-satisfying thing, inherently economic-based. 

Internal marketing Attempting to ensure that all employees are positive ambassadors of the 
organization. 

Competitive advantage Convince buyers (potential customers) that what you have to offer them 
comes closest to meeting their particular want or need at that point in time. 

Marketing concept Understanding the consumer and working from the customer back rather 
than factory forward. 



DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 



1. How would you have defined marketing before you read this chapter? How does; that definition 
differ from the definition provided? 

2. Can you think of another organization that demonstrates the propositions of marketing as well 
as L. L. Bean? Provide a similar discussion using that organization. 

3. What are the factors to consider in maintaining consumer contact? Community contact? 

4. Why is it so important to understand your competition? Company functions? 

5. Contrast macro- and micromarketing. Contrast services and goods marketing. 

6. Demonstrate how the corporate mission can directly influence marketing. 



CASE APPLICATION 25 

7. What is the difference between the internal and external environment') Provide five examples 
of each. 2 

8. What is a competitive advantage? How does marketing contribute to the creation of a competi- 
tive advantage? 

9. Discuss the reasons for studying maiketing. 

10. Give examples of how marketing communication differs from personal communication. 



PROJECT 



Survey 10 nonbusiness students and ask them to provide a definition of marketing. Analyze these 
answers with respect to how they differ and why people differed in their understanding of this topic. 
Write a five-page report explaining. 



CASE APPLICATION 



THE HOG IS ALIVE AND WELL 

After making a remarkable comeback in the 1980s, motorcycle manufacturer Harley-Davidson had 
two-year-long waiting lists allover the country. But the success placed the company in a familiar 
quandary. Should Harley expand and risk a market downturn or should it stay the course, content 
with its good pusition in the industry? 

"To invest or not to invest, that was the question," notes Frank Cimermancic, Harley's Direc- 
tor of Business Planning. "Dealers were begging us to build more motorcycles. But you have to under- 
stand our history. One of the things that caused past problems was lack of quality, and that was the 
result of a too-rigid expansion. We did not want to relive that situation.' 

In 1989, the reputation of Harley-Davidson was excellent. Harley shipped 30,000 motorcycles 
in 1985; just four years later it shipped 44,000. Harley's market share in the heavyweight bike cate- 
gory went from 27% to 57% during the same time period. It was regularly turning a profit-$53 mil- 
lion in 1989. 

At the same time, however, the market for heavyweight bikes was shrinking. Harley-Davidson 
needed to know whether its growth could continue. "We were doing fine, but look at the market," 
said Cimermancic. "Maybe, we thought, we could reverse these trends and become an industry leader, 
something we hadn't been for years." 

A new kind of customer seemed to hold the key to market growth. White-collar motorcycle 
enthusiasts, or "Rubbies" (rich urban bikers), started to shore up Harley sales in the mid-1980s, adding 
to the company's success and image. But whether these people were reliable, long-term customers 
was another question. Harley also needed to know if it should market its product differently to dif- 
ferent audiences. A core clientele of traditional "bikers" had kept Harley afloat dUllng its leanest years, 
and they could not be alienated. 

From their research, Harley identified seven core customer types: the Adventure-Loving Tra- 
ditionalist, the Sensitive Pragmatist, the Stylish Status-Seeker, the Laid-Back Camper, the Classy Cap- 
italist, the Cool-Headed Loner, and the Cocky Misfit. All of them appreciated Harley-Davidson for 
the same reasons: independence, freedom, and power constituted the universal Harley appeal. Also, 
owners were very loyal. 

Loyalty meant the company could build and sell more motorcycles without having to overex- 
tend itself. In 1990, Harley expanded to build 62,800 bikes; in 2000, it built more than 180,000. Based 
on research and the still-expanding waiting lists, Harley expects its phenomenal growth to continue. 
In addition, Harley is expanding its product line. In early 2000, the company introduced a $4,400 
bike called the Blast, aimed at first-time riders and women. 



26 CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCING MARKETING 



REFERENCES 



Sources: Ian P. Murphy, "Aided by Research, Harley Goes Whole Hog," The Marketing News, December 2, 1996, 
p. 16; Richard A. Melcher, "Tune-up Time for Harley," Business Week, April 8,1996, pp. 90.94; Kelly BatTOn, 
"HogWild," Forbes, May 15,2000, pp. 68-70. 

Questio US: 

1 . Identify the ways in which Harley-Davidson exhibits the propositions discussed in this chapter. 

2. Would you consider Harley to be a marketing organization') Why or why not? 



/. Dictionary of Marketing Tenns, Peter D. Bennett, Ed., American Mar- 4. Shelby D. Hunt and John J. Burnett, "The MacromarketinglMicro- 
keting Association, 1988 p. 54. marketing Dichotomy; A Taxonomical Model," Journal of Markel- 

2. "A New Recipe for the Family Dinner.' Adweek, April 27. 1992, p. 46. ing, Summer. 1982 pp. 11-26. 

3. Theodore Levitt, "Marketing Myopia," Harvard Business Review, 
July-August, 1960, pp. 45-66. 



CHAPTER 



\£m 



UNDERSTANDING AND 
APPROACHING THE MARKET 



LEARNING OBJECTIVES 



After studying this chapter, you should be able to: 

Understand the role of the market in the exchange process. 

Distinguish between the basic kinds of markets. 

Appreciate the differences between the undifferentiated and seg- 
mental approach toward markets. 

Understand the various bases for market segmentation. 
Translate segmentation concepts into the activity of selecting a 
target market. 



THE WEB SEGMENT 



Online advertising is still a relatively tiny market, but an increasing number of 
companies are vying for the right to tell advertisers and their ad agencies where and how 
to responsibly spend their limited pool of Web ad dollars. 

Easier said than done. No reliable measurements exist for determining the size of 
the Web audience, leaving advertisers to sort through a dizzying number of competing 
claims from different web sites. The creator of a system that catches on with advertisers 
has a big opportunity: the chance to become the Nielsen of the Internet. 

The latest entrant in the race to accurately count Web viewers: Relevant. Knowledge, 
an Atlanta-based company founded by fOrmer Turner Broadcasting executives and 
staffed with research executives with experience counting eyeballs in traditional media 
like television and radio. This company provides standardized, detailed demographic 
data and faster feedback about Web viewing, among other services. Relevant. Knowledge 
has been delivering data on a test basis to companies including CNN, Sony, cINET, and 
Microsoft's MSN Network. 

Relevant. Knowledge is taking aim at one of the biggest issues bedeviling online 
advertisers and publishers: a dearth of reliable information that advertisers can use to 
justify buying ads on the Web. So far, advertisers have been caught in a culture clash 
between technology buffs and traditional researchers. The result: not enough data that 
can be applied to multiple web sites. Individual sites provide information about the num- 
ber of visitors they receive, but such results can't easily be compared to what other sites 
may be supplying And most sites can't distinguish one Derson visiting the same site over 



27 



28 CHAPTER 2 UNDERSTANDING AND AFPROACHINGTHE MARKET 



and over again from a new visitor. Instead, media buyers have had to rely on more primi- 
tive tools, like reports about what competitors are spending and where. 

Sources: AI Urbansky. "Escape To The Net," Promo, February 2000. pp. 21-22; Heather Green, "Gelling Too Personal." Busi- 
ness Week e.biz, February 7,2000. p. EBI4; "You've got Spam:' .\merican Demographics, September 1999. p. 22; Christine 
LeBeau, "Cracking the Niche," American Demographics, June 2000, pp. 38-39. 



INTRODUCTION 



Knowing your market accurately and completely is a prerequisite for successful market- 
ing. This task is made even more difficult for companies trying to advertise on the Web. 
Yet, as noted earlier, this trend toward using the Internet will continue. Three important con- 
cepts related to the topic of markets are presented in this chapter: defining the nature of 
markets, identifying the types of markets, and a discussion of product differentiation and 
market segmentation. 



DEFININGTHE MARKET 



The market can be viewed from many different perspectives and, consequently, is impos- 
sible to define precisely. In order to provide some clarity, we provide a basic definition of 
a market: A group ofpotential buyers with needs and wants and the purchasing power to 
satisfy them. Rather than attempting to cut through the many specialized uses of the term, 
it is more meaningful to describe several broad characteristics and use this somewhat ambigu- 
ous framework as the foundation for a general definition. 

The Market Is People 

Since exchange involves two or more people, it is natural to think of the market as people, 
individuals, or groups. Clearly, without the existence of people to buy and consume goods, 
services, and ideas, there would be little reason for marketing. Yet this perspective must be 
refined further if it is to be useful. 

People constitute markets only if they have overt or latent wants and needs. That is, 
individuals must currently recognize their need or desire for an existing or future product, 
or have & potential need or desire for an existing or future product. While the former con- 
dition is quite straightforward, the latter situation is a bit more confusing, in that it forces 
the marketer to develop new products that satisfy unmet needs. Potential future customers 
must be identified and understood. 

When speaking of markets as people, we are not concerned exclusively with indi- 
vidual ultimate consumers. Although individuals and members of households do eonsiitute 
the most important and largest category of markets, business establishments and other organ- 
ized behavior systems also represent valid markets. People, individually or in groups, busi- 
nesses, and instihltions create markets. 

However, people or organizations must meet certain basic criteria in order to repre- 
sent a valid market: 

1. There must be a true Iced and/or want for the product, service, or idea; this need 
may be recognized unrecognized, or latent. 

2. The person/organization must have the ability to pay for the product via means 
acceptable to the marketer. 



DEFINING THE MARKET 29 

3. The person/organization must be willing to buy the product. 

4. The person/organization must have the authority to buy the product. 

5. The total number of people/organizations meeting the previous criteria must be 
large enough to be profitable for the marketer. 

All five criteria must be met for an aggregate group of people or organizations to equate 
to a market. Failure to achieve even one of the criteria may negate the viability of a mar- 
ket. An interesting example is the pharmaceutical industry. There are several serious human 
diseases that remain uncured only because they have not been contracted by a large enough 
number of people to warrant the necessary research. The excessive research costs required 
to develop these drugs necessitates that companies are assured a certain level of profitability. 
Even though the first four criteria may be met, a small potential customer base means no 
viable market exists. 

The Market Is a Place 

Thinking of the market as a place- "the marketplace"- is a common practice of the gen- 
eral public. Such locations do exist as geographical areas within which trading occurs. In 
this context, we can think of world markets, international markets, American markets, regions, 
states, cities, and parts of cities. A shapping center, a block, a portion of a block, and even 
the site of a single retail store can be called a market. 

While not as pervasive as the "people" component of the market, the "place" descrip- 
tion of a market is important too. Since goods must be delivered to and customers attracted 
toward particular places where transactions; are made, this identification of markets is use- 
ful for marketing decision-making purposes, factors such as product features, price, loca- 
tion of facilities, routing salespeople, and promotional design are all affected by the geographic 
market. Even in the case of unmeasurable fields, such as religion, a marketplace might be 
Yankee Stadium, where Billy Graham is holding a revival. Finally, a market may be some- 
where other than a geographical region, such as a catalogue or ad that allows you to place 
an order without the assistance of a marketing intermediary or an 800 number. 

The Market Is an Economic Entity 

In most cases, a market is characterized by a dynamic system of economic forces. The four 
most salient economic forces are supply, demand; competition, and government interven- 
tion. The terms buyer's market and seller's market describe different conditions of bargaining 
strength. We also use terms such a." monopoly, oligopoly, and pure competition to reflect 
the competitive situation in a particular market. Finally, the extent of personal freedom and 
government control produces free market systems, socialistic systems, and other systems 
of trade and commerce, i 

Again, placing these labels on markets allows the marketer to design strategies that 
match a particular economic situation. We know, for instance, that in a buyer's market, there 
is an abundance of product, prices are usually low, and customers dictate the terms of sale. 
U.S. firms find that they must make tremendous strategy adjustments when they sell their 
products in Third World markets. The interaction of these economic factors is what creates 
a market. 

There is always the pressure of competition as new firms enter and old ones exit. Adver- 
tising and selling pressure, price and counterprice, claim and counterclaim, service and extra 
service are all weapons of competitive pressure Lhat marketers use to achieve and protect 
market positions. Market composition is constantly changing. 



30 CHAPTER 2 UNDERSTANDING ANDAPPROACHINGTHE MARKET 

TYPES OF MARKETS 



Now that we have defined market; in a general sense, it is useful to discus s the character- 
istics of the primary types of markets: (1) consumer markets, (2) industrial markers, (3) 
institutional markets, and (4) reseller markets. It should be noted that these categories are 
not always clear-cut. In some industries, a business may be in a different category altogether 
or may even encompass multiple categories. It is also possible that a product may be sold 
in all four markets. Consequently, it is important to know as much as possible about how 
these markets differ so that appropriate marketing activities can be clevelopeu. 

Consumer Markets 

When we talk about consumer markets, we are including those individuals and households 
who buy and consume goods and services for their own personal use. They are not inter- 
ested in reselling the product or setting themselves up as a manufacturer. Considering the 
thousands of new products, services, and ideas being introduced each day and the increased 
capability of consumers to afford these products, the size, complexity, and future growth 
potential of the consumer market is staggering. The next chapter, Chanter 3, touches on 
many of these issues. 

Industrial Markets 

The industrial market consists of organizations and the people who work for them, those 
who buy products or services for use in their own businesses or to make other products. 
For example, a steel mill might purchase computer software, pencils, and flooring as part 
of the operation and maintenance of their business. Likewise, a refrigerator manufactuler 
might purchase sheets of steel, wiring, shelving, and so forth, as part of its fmal product. 2 
These purchases occur in the industrial market. 

There is substantial evidence that industlial markets function differently than do con- 
sumer markets and that the buying process in particular is different. 

Institutional Markets 

Anuther important market sector is made up of various types of profit and nonprofit insti- 
tutions, such as hospitals, schools, churches, and government agencies. Institutional mar- 
kets differ f;'om typical businesses in that they are not motivated primarily by profits or market 
share. Rather, institutions tend to satisfy somewhat esoteric, often intangible, needs. Also, 
whatever profits exist after all expenses are paid are normally put back into the institution. 
Because inststutions operate under different restrictions and employ different goals, mar- 
keters must use different strategies to be successful. 

Reseller Markets 

All intermediaries that buy finished or semi-finished products and resell them for profit are 
part of the reseller market. This market includes approximately 383,000 wholesalers and 
1,300,000 retailers that operate in the U.S. With the exception of products obtained directly 
from the producer, all products are sold through resellers. Since resellers operate under unique 
business characteristics, they must be approached carefully. Producers are always cognizant 
of the fact that successful marketing to resellers is just as important as successful market- 
ing to consumers. 



APPROACHING THE MARKET 



31 



r~,. - > <r , ~ 


I 

OLYMPUS' 

Focus On Life 


E 

... * 


f © ■ 


. 


- 

WHEN WE SAY IT'S A POCKET CAMERA; 
WE ACTUALLY MEAN THIS POCKET. 






introducing the world's smallest 35mm zoom camera. 

That's tf>s ne»v Olympus Stylus Ep: Zccm &i up there, actual size, Hovv d vre manage to paclf so many powerful 
fejftlurt* f nlo suTeTi . i &n tall jp*»? Wall, wv" w boon b^ild-ny surgrt At cftdtoccp&s for ye* * oott - and toffifureo' 
U iqtfMZi ng tt oso [ ir-y c ameras into the mtnuie passageways «ns itf e Iht human body, slipping this ens into 
your «Hfi pKkc( WW a vr^p And ho/, snoulcfF] I thy *rnaUr>st pocket camera <t! into your *rraU«tp«fcet? 

fXCt UJ"ittf Ml TO (« li* BAt 4KCIKC Ft AM • <ST *T*ff (r?ftff OFJH Q • f tLl . EH r t <V»K • tf □ Frf 7 »f OUC rj-n-H * !« Tf 1 Utf S r f 1 A* M SYJ T f M 

IILV'.'H ' Pfl -,:IH </H.-- ff.L !,■■■.! tfut ■ .!■■ ; i-d(-i-j'- '.-,'. .1.1,,.. I.«(1.. . J.. ■ , ,'i.' .-. .). ■■ ,<. . I-t.lI. .-:.-v*-* HfU'r, MM [ J 

3-rr," tf- jj- 



AD 2.1 The Olympus camera is part of the consumer market. 



APPROACHING THE MARKET 



A;l the parties in an exchange usually have the ability to select their exchange partner(s). 
For the customer, whether consumer, indus:rial buyer, institution, or reseller, product choices 
are made daily. For a product provider, the person(s) or organization(s) selected as poten- 
tial customers are referred to as the target market. A product provider might ask: given that 
my product will not be needed and/or wanted by all people in the market, and given that my 



32 CHAPTER 2 UNDERSTANDING AND APPROACHINGTHE MARKET 



TO HELP PREVENT MARIJUANA USE BY YOUR KIDS, 
HELP THEM ROLL THIS. 




Parents who get involved In th.lt children's activities raise kids who are loss likely to smoke pot. 
Get the book on raising a drug-free kid. Can t 800 788-2800. 



OWm JI*JB U ffnQ »«U^ftJ rt ^ H WH HIat*O^Pi l fll ( M**' 



PARENTS: 



The Anti-Drug. 



AD 2.2 An example of an institutional ad. 



organization has certain strengths and weaknesses, which target group within the market 
should I select? The process is depicted in Figure 2.1 

For a particular product, marketing organizations might follow an undifferentiated, 
segmentation, or combination approach toward a market. These concepts are explained in 
the following sections. 



The Undifferentiated Market (Market Aggregation) 

The undifferentiated approach occurs when the marketer ignores the apparent differences 
that exist within the market and uses a marketing strategy that is intended to appeal to as 



Access market 
needs and company 
capabilities to meet 
needs profitably. 



Select a 
strategic 
approach to 
the market. 



APPROACHING THE MARKET 33 

Undifferentiated [Target market(s) r-H Actions 
Segmented [Target market(s) r-H Actions 

■Target market(s) r->*j 



Combination 



Actions 



FIGURE 2.1 Approaches to the market 



many people as possible. In essence, the market is viewed as a homogeneous aggregate. 
Admittedly, this assumption is risky, and there is always the chance that it will appeal to 
no one, or that the amount of waste in resources will be greater than the total gain in sales. 

For certain types of widely consumed items (e.g., gasoline, soft drinks, white bread), 
the undifferentiated market approach makes the most sense. One example was the campaign 
in which Dr. Pepper employed a catchy general-appeal SlOgan, "Be A PEPPER!", that really 
said nothing specific about the product, yet spoke to a wide range of consumers. Often, this 
type of general appeal is supported by positive, emotional settings, and a great many rein- 
forcers at the point-of-purchase. Walk through any supermarket and you will observe hun- 
dreds of food products that are perceived as nearly identical by the consumer and are treated 
as such by the producer-especially knock-off or generic items. 

Identifying products that have a universal appeal is only one of many criteria to be 
met if an undifferentiated approach is to work. The number of consumers exhibiting a need 
for the identified product must be large enough to generate satisfactory profits. A product 
such as milk would probably have universal appeal and a large market; something like a 
set of dentures might not. However, adeqjate market size is not an absolute amount and 
must be evaluated for each product. 

Two other considerations are important: the per unit profit margin and the amount of 
competition. Bread has a very low profit margin and many competitors, thus requiring a 
very large customer base. A product such as men's jockey shorts delivers a high profit but 
has few competitors. 

Success with an undifferentiated market approach is also contingent on the abilities 
of the marketer to correctly identify potential customers and design an effective and com- 
petitive strategy. Since the values, attitudes, and behaviors of people are constantly chang- 
ing, it is crucial to monitor these changes. Introduce numerous cultural differences, and an 
extremely complex situation emerges. There is also the possibility that an appeal that is 
pleasing to a great diversity of people may not then be strong or clear enough to be truly 
effective with any of these people. 

Finally, the competitive situation might also promote an undifferentiated strategy. All 
would agree that Campbell's dominates the canned soup industry, and that there is little 
reason for them to engage in much differentiation. Clearly, for companies that have a very 
large share of the market undifferentiated IT'arket coverage makes sense. For a company 
with small market share, it might be disastrous. 3 



Product Differentiation 

Most undifferentiated markets contain a high level of competition. How does a company 
compete when all the product offerings are basically the same and many companies are 
in fierce competition? The answer is to engage in a strategy referred to as product differ- 
entiation. It is an attempt to tangibly or intangibly distinguish a product from that of all 



34 CHAPTER 2 UNDERSTANDING AND APPROACHING THE MARKET 



competitors in the eyes of customers. Examples of tangihle differences might be product 
features, performance, endurance, location, or support services, to name but a few. Chrysler 
once differentiated their product by offering a 7-yearI70,OOO-mile warranty on new mod- 
els. Pepsi has convinced mallY consumers to try their product because they assert that it 
really does taste better than Coke. Offering products at a lower price or at several differ- 
ent prices can be an importanl distinguishing characteristic, as demonstrated by Timex 
watches. 

Some products are in fact the same, and attempts to differentiate through tangible fea- 
tures would be either futile or easiy copied. In such cases, an image of uifference is cre- 
ated tlu'ough intangible means that may have little to do with the product directly. Soft drink 
companies show yOJ how much fun you can have by drinking their product. Beer compa- 
nies suggest status, enjoyment, and masculinity. Snapple may not taste the best or have the 
fewest calories, but may have the funniest, most memorable commercials. There tends to 
be a heavy emphasis on the use of mass appeal means of promotion, such as advertising, 
when differentiated through intangibles. Note the long-term use of Bill Cosby by Jell-0 to 
create an image of fun. Microsoft has successfully differentiated itself through an image 
of innovation and exceptional customer service. 

There are certain risks in using product differentiation. First, a marketer who uses 
product differentiation must be careful not to eliminate mention of core appeals or features 
that the consumer expects from the product. For example differen dating a brand of bread 
through its unique vitamin and mineral content is valid as long as you retain the core fresh- 
ness feature in your ad. Second, highlighting features that are too different from the norm 
may prove ineffective. Finally, a product may be differentiated on a basis that is unimpor- 
tant to the customer or difficult to understand. The automobile industry has learned to avoid 
technical copy in ads since most consumers don't understand it or don't care. 

However, there is a flip-side to product differentiation, an approach toward the mar- 
ket called market segmentation. 4 

The Segmented Market 

While product differentiation is an effective strategy to distinguish your brand from com- 
petitors', it also differentiates your own products from one another. For example, a com- 
pany such as Franco-American Spaghetti has differentiated its basic product by offering 
various sizes, flavOrs, and shapes. The objective is to sell more product, to more people, 
more often. Kraft has done the same with their salad dressings; Xerox with its multitude 
of office products. The problem is not competition; the problem is the acknowledgement 
that people within markets are different and that successful marketers must respond tc these 
differences. 

This premise of segmenting the market therOlzes that people and/or organizations can 
be most effectively approached by recognizing their oiffeiences and adjusting accordingly. 
By emphasizing a segmentation approach, the exchange process should be enhanced, since 
a company can more precisely match the needs and wants of the customer. Even the soft 
drink manufacturers have moved away from the undifferentiated approach and have intro- 
duced diet, caffeine-free, and diet-caffeine-free versions of their basic preduct. s 

While it is relatively easy to identify segments of consumers, most finns do not have 
the capabilities or the need to effectively market their product to all of the segments that 
can be identified. Rather, one or more target markets (segments) must be selected. In real- 
ity, market segmentation is both a disaggregation and aggregation process. While the mar- 
ket is initially reduced to its smallest homogeneous components (perhaps a single individual). 



APPROACHING THE MARKET 35 

business in practice requires the marketer to find common dimensions that will allow him 
to view these individuals as larger, profitable segments. Thus, market segmentation is a two- 
fold process that includes: (1) identifying and classifying people into homogeneous group- 
ings, called segments, and (2) determining which of these segments are viable target markets. 
In essence, the marketing objectives of segmentation analysis are: 

1. To reduce risk in deciding where, when, how, and to whom a product, service, or 
brand will be marketed 

2. To increase marketing efficiency by directing effort specifically toward the des- 
ignated segment in a manner consistent with that segment's characteristics 

Segmentation Strategies 

There are two major segmentation strategies followed by marketing organizations: a con- 
centration strategy and a multisegment strategy. 

An organization that adopts a concentration strategy chooses to focus its marketing 
efforts on only one market segment. Only one marketing mix is developed. For example, 
the manufacturer of Rolex watches has chosen to concentrate on the luxury segment of the 
watch market. An organization that adopts a concentration strategy gains an advantage by 
being able to analyze the needs and wants of only one segment a,ld then focusing all its 
efforts on that segment. This can provide a differential advantage over other organizations 
that market to this segment but do not concentrate all their efforts on it. The primary dis- 
advantage of concentration is related to the demand of the segment. As long as demand is 
strong, the organization's financial position will be strong. But if demand declines, the orga- 
nization's financial position will also decline. 

The other segmentation strategy is a multisegment strategy. When an organization 
adopts this strategy, it focuses its marketing efforts on two or more distinct market segments. 
The organization does so by developing a distinct marketing mix for each segment. They 
then develop marketing programs tailored to each of these segments. Organizations that fol- 
low a multisegment strategy usually realize an increase in total sales as more marketing 
programs are focused at more customers. However, the organization will most likely expe- 
rience higher costs because of the need for more than 0"8 marketing program. 6 

Bases of Segmentation 

There are many different ways by which a company can segment its market, and the cho- 
sen process varies from one product to another. Further, the segmentation process should 
be an ongoing activity. Since markets are very dynamic, and products change over time, 
the bases for segmentation must likewise change. (See Figure 2.2.) 



1. Defining the market 

a. The market is people 

b. The market is a place 

c. The market is an economic entity 

2. Types of markets 

a. Consumer markets 

b. Industrial markets 



c. Institutional markets 

d. Reseller markets 

3. Approaching the market 

a. The undifferentiated market (market aggregation) 

b. Product differentiation 

c. The segmented market 

1. Strategies: concentration, multisegment 



36 CHAPTER 2 UNDERSTANDING AND APPROACHINGTHE MARKET 

Bases for Segmentation 



Primary Dimension Consumer Market Industrial MarKet 

Characteristics of Geography, age, sex, race, Industry (SIC), location, size, 

person or organization income, life cycle, technology, profitability, 

personality, lifestyle legal, buying situation 

Purchase situation Purpose, benefits, purchase Volume, frequency, application, 

approach, choice criteria, choice criteria, purchasing 

brand loyalty, importance procedure, importance 

FIGURE 2.2 Bases for Segmenting Markets: Consumer and Industrial Markets 



In line with these basic differences we will first discuss the bases for segmenting ulti- 
mate consumers followed by a discussion of the factors used to segment industrial users. 

Segmenting Ultimate Consumers 

Geographic Segments Geography probably represents the oldest basis for seg- 
mentation. Regional differences in consumer tastes for products as a whole are well-known. 
Markets according to location are easily identified and large amounts of data are usually 
available. Many companies simply do not have the resources to expand beyond local or 
regional levels; thus, they must focus on one geographic segment only. Domestic and for- 
eign segments are the broadest type of geographical segment. 

Closely associated with geographic location are inherent characteristics of that loca- 
tion: weather, topography, and physical factors such as rivers, mountains, or ocean prox- 
imity. Conditions of high humidity, excessive rain or draught, snow or cold all influence 
the purchase of a wide spectrum of products. While marketers no longer segment markets 
as being east or west of the Mississippi River, people living near the Mississippi may con- 
stitute a viable segment for several products, such as flood insurance, fishing equipment, 
and dredging machinery. 

Population density can also place people in unique market segments. High-density 
states such as California and New York and cities such as New York City, Hong Kong, and 
London create the need for products such as security systems, fast-food restaurants, and 
public transportation. 

Geographic segmentation offers some important advantages. There is very little waste 
in the marketing effort, in that the product and supporting activities such as advertising, 
physical distribution, and repair can all be directed at the customer. Further, geography pro- 
vides a convenient organizational framework. Products, salespeople, and distribution net- 
works can all be organized around a central, specific location. 

The drawbacks in using a geographic basis of segmentation are also notable. There 
is always the obvious possibility that consumer preferences may (unexpectedly) bear no 
relationship to location. Other factors, such as ethnic origin or income, may overshadow 
location. The stereotypical Texan, for example, is hard to find in Houston, where one-third 
of the population has immigrated from other states. Another problem is that most geographic 
areas are very large, regional locations. It is evident that the Eastern seaboard market con- 
tains many subsegments. Members of a geographic segment often tend to be too hetero- 
geneous to qualify as a meaningful target for marketing action. 

Demographic Segments Several demographic characteristics have proven to be par- 
ticularly relevant when marketing to ultimate consumers. Segmenting the consumer mar- 
ket by age groups has been quite useful for several products. For example, the youth market 
(approximately 5 to 13) not only influences how their parents spend money, but also make 



APPROACHING THE MARKET 3 7 




AD 2.3 The focus is on the pre-teen to young adult segment, assuming they will test prod- 
uct features at the store. 



purchases of their own. Manufacturers of products such as toys, records, snack foods, and 
video games have designed promotional efforts directed at this group. More recently, the 
elderly market (age 65 and over) has grown in importance for producers of products such 
as low-cost housing, cruises, hobbies, and health care. 

Gender has also historically been a good basis for market segmentation. While there 
are some obvious products designed for men or women, many of these traditional bound- 
aries are changing, and marketing must apprise themselves of these changes. The emer- 
gence of the working women, for instance, has made determination of who performs certain 
activities in the family (e.g., shopping, car servicing), and how the family income is spent 
more difficult. New magazines such as Men 's Guide to Fashion, Modem Black Man, Sports- 
wear International, NV, and Vibe indicate how media is attempting to subsegment the male 
segment. Thus, the simple classification of male versus female may be useful only if sev- 
eral other demographic and behavioral characteristics are considered as well. 

Another demographic trait closely associated with age and sex is thefamity life cycle. 
There is evidence iliat, based on family structure (i.e., number of adults and children), fam- 
ilies go through very predictable behavioral patterns. For example, a young couple who have 
one young child will have far different purchasing needs than a couple in their late fifties 



38 CHAPTER 2 UNDERSTANDING AND APPROACHING THE MARKET 



whose children have moved out. In a similar way, the types of products purchased by anewly 
married couple will differ from those of a couple with older children. 7 

Income is perhaps the most common demographic oasis for segmenting a market. This 
may be partly because income often dictates who can or cannot afford a particular prod- 
uct. It is quite reasonable, for example, to assume that individuals earning minimum wage 
could not easily purchase a $25,000 sports car. Income tends to be a better basis for seg- 
menting markets as the price tag for a product increases. Income may not be quite as valu- 
able for products such as bread, cigarettes, and motor oil. Income may also be helpful in 
examining certain types of buying behavior. For example, individuals in the lower-middle 
income group are prone to use coupons. Playboy recently announced the introduction of a 
special edition aimed at the subscribers with annual incomes over $45,000. 

Several other demographic characteristics can influence various types of consumer 
activities. Education, for example, affects product preferences as well as characteristics 
demanded for certain products. Occupation can also be important. Individuals who work 
in hard physical labor occupations (e.g., coal mining) may demand an entirely different set 
of products than a person employed as a teacher or bank teller, even though their incomes 
are the same. Geographic mobility is somewhat related to occupation, in that certain occu- 
pations (e.g. , military, corporate executives) require a high level of mobility. High geographic 
mobility necessitates that a person (or family) acquire new shopping habits, seek new sources 
of products and services, and possibly develop new brand preferences. Finally, race and 
national origin have been associated with product preferences and media preferences. Black 
Americans have exhibited preferences in respect to food, transportation, and entenainment, 
to name a few. Hispanics tend to prefer radio and television over newspapers and maga- 
zines as a means for learning about products. The following Integrated Marketing box dis- 
cusses how race may be an overlooked segment. 89 

Even religion is used as a basis for segmentation. Several interesting findings have 
arisen from the limited research in this area. Aside from the obvious higher demands for 
Christian-oriented magazines, books, music, entertainment, jewelry, educational institutions, 
and counseling services, differences in demand for secular products and services have been 
identified as well. For example, the Christian consumer attends movies less frequently than 
consumers in general and spends more time in volunteer, even non-chu:ch-related, activities. 

Notwithstanding its apparent advantages (i.e., low cost and ease of implementation), 
considerable uncertainty -jxists about demographic segmentation. The method is often mis- 
used. A typical misuse of the approach has been to construct "profiles" of product users. 
For example, it might be said that the typical consumer of Mexican food is under 35 years 
of age, has a college education, earns more than $10,000 a year, lives in a Suburban fringe 
of a moderate-size urban community, and resides in the West. True, these characteristics 
do describe atypical consumer of Mexican food, but they also describe a lot of other con- 
sumers as well, and may paint an inaccurate portrait of many other consumers. 

Usage Segments In 1964, Twedt made one of the earliest departures from demo- 
graphic segmentation when he suggested that the heavy user, or frequent consumer, was 
an important basis for segmentation. He proposed that consumption should be measured 
directly, and that promotion should be aimed directly at the heavy user. This approach has 
become very popular, particularly in the beverage industry (e.g.. beer, soft drinks, and spir- 
its). Considerable research has been conducted with this particular group and the results 
suggest that finding other characteristics that correlate with usage rate often greatly enhances 
marketing efforts.' 

Four other bases for market segmentation have evolved from the usage-level criteria. 
The first is purchase occasion. Determining the reason for an airline passenger's trip, for 



APPROACHING THE MARKET 39 



SEEKING THE AFRICAN-AMERICAN WEB COMMUNITY 



Silas Myers is a new millenniumAfrican-American. He's 31, 
holds an MBA from Harvard University, works as an invest- 
ment analyst for money manager Hotchkeo & Wiley, and pulls 
in a salary close to six figures. And he spends about 10 hours 
a week online, buying everything from a JVC portable radio 
to Arm & Hammer deodorant. "Maybe I'm nuts," he says, "but 
shopping online is so much easier to me." 

Millions of African-Americans are online. They're 
younger, more affluent, and better educated than their offline 
kin. And they're not tiptoeing onto the Net. They're right at 
home. Five million blacks now cruise through cyberspace, 
nearly equaling the combined number of Hispanic, Asian, and 
Native American surfers, according to researcher Cyber 
Dialogue. 

True, Net use among African-Americans continues to lag 
behind the online white population: 28% of blacks as opposed 
to 37% for whites. But it's time to take a closer look at the 
digital divide. While those who don't have Net access tend 
to be poor and undereducated, there's a large group of African- 
Americans who are spending aggressively on the Web. "We're 
looking at a tidal wave coming of African-American-focused 
content and online consumers," says Omar J. Wasow, exec- 
utive director of BlackPlanet.com, a black-oriented online 
community. "You ignore it at your peril." 



With good reason, African- Americans have become smit- 
ten with the ability to compare prices and find bargains online. 
Melvin Crenshaw, manager of Kidpreneurs magazine, 
recently used the Travelocity Web site to save $300 on a ski 
trip to Denver. "I really liked the value," he says. 

It's a shame, then, that so few sites market to such an attrac- 
tive group. Almost every bookstore on the street has a sec- 
tion in African- American or ethnic literature. So it's shocking 
that e-commerce giants like Amazon.com don't have ethnic 
book sections. The solution is easy. Web merchants can cre- 
ate what the National Urban League's B. Keith Fulton calls 
"micro bundles"-Web categories within a site's merchan- 
dise that resemble the inner-city black bookstore or clothier. 
"You want blacks to click on a button and feel like they're in 
virtual Africa or virtual Harlem," says Fulton, the Urban 
League's director of Technology programs and policy. To 
attract blacks, he recommends decorating that comer of the 
site in kinte cloth patterns. 

Sources: Roger O. Crockett, "Attention Must Be Paid," Business 
Week e-biz, February 7, 2000, p. 16; Kate Fitzgerald, "Connection 
Confirmation," Advertising Age, November 29, 1999, p. S-3; 
"African-Americans Online," Advertising Age, November 29, 
1999, p. $-14. 



instance, may be the most relevant cliteria for segmenting airline consumers. The same may 
be true for products such as long-distance calling or the purchase of snack foods. The sec- 
ond basis is user status. It seems apparent that communication strategies must differ if they 
are directed at different use patterns, such as nonusers versus ex-users, or one-time users 
versus regular users. New car producers have become very sensitive to the need to provide 
new car buyers with a great deal of supportive information after the sale in order to mini- 
mize unhappineSK after the purchase. However, determining how long this information is 
necessary or effective is still anybody's guess. The third basis is loyalty. This approach places 
consumers into loyalty categories based on their purchase patterns of particular brands. A 
key category is the brand-loyal consumer. Companies have assumed that if they can iden- 
tify individuals who are brand loyal to their brand, and then delineate other characteristics 
these people have in common, they will locate the ideal target market. There is still a great 
deal of uncertainty as to how to correctly measure brand loyalty. The final characteristic is 
stage of readiness. It is proposed that potential customers can be segmented as follows: 
unaware, aware, informed, interested, desirous, and intend to buy. Thus if a marketing man- 
ager is aware of where the specific segment of potential customers is, he/she can design 
the appropriate market strategy to move them tnrough the various stages of readiness. Again, 
these stages of readiness are rather vague and difficult to accurately measure. 



Psychological Segments Research results show that the concept of segmentation 
should recognize psychological as well as demographic influences. For example, Phillip 



40 CHAPTER 2 UNDERSTANDING AND APPROACHING THE MARKET 



Morris has segmented the market for cigarette brands by appealing psychologically to con- 
sumers in the following way: 

• Marlboro: the broad appeal of the American cowboy 

• Benson & Hedges: sophisticated, upscale appeal 

• Parliament: a recessed filter for those who want to avoid direct contact with tobacco 

• Merit: low tar and nicotine 

• Virginia Slims: appeal based on "You've come a long way, baby" theme 

Evidence suggests that attitudes of prospective buyers towards certain products influ- 
ence their subsequent purchase or non-purchase of them. If persons with similar attitudes 
can be isolated, they represent an important psychological segment. Attitudes cm be defined 
as predispositions to behave in certain ways in response to given stimulus. 1 1 

Personality is defined as the long-lasting characteristics and behaviors of a person 
that allow them to cope and respond to their environment. Very early on, marketers were 
examining personality traits as a means for segmenting consumers. None of these early stud- 
ies suggest that measurable personality traits offer much prospect of market segmentation. 
However, an almost inescapable logic seems to dictate that consumption of particular prod- 
ucts o r brands must be meaningfully related to consumer personality. It is frequently noted 
that the elderly dJive big cars, that the new rich spend disproportionately more on housing 
and other visible symbols of success, and that extroverts d r ess conspicuously. 12 

Motives are closely related to attitudes. A motive is a reason for behavior. A buying 
motive triggers purchasing activity. The latter is general, the former more specific. In the- 
ory this is what market segmentation is all about. Measurements of demographic, person- 
ality, and attitudinal variables are really convenient measurements of less conspicuous 
motivational factors. People with similar physical and psychological characteristics are pre- 
sumed to be similarly motivated. Motives can be positive (convenience), or negative (fear 
of pain). The question logically arises: why not observe motivation directly and classify 
market segments accordingly? 

Lifestyle refers to the orientation that an individual or a group has toward consump- 
tion, work, and play and can be defined as a pattern of attitudes, interests, and opinions 
held by a person. Lifestyle segmentation has become very popular with marketers, because 
of the availability of measurement devices and instruments, and the intuitive categories that 
result from this process. 13 As a result, producers are targeting versions of their products 
and their promotions to various lifestyle segments. Thus, companies like All State Insur- 
ance are designing special programs for the good driver, who has been extensively char- 
acterized through a lifestyle segoentation approach. 14 , 15 

Lifestyle analysis begins by asking questions about the consumer's activities, inter- 
ests, and opinions. If a man earns $40,000-$50,000 per year as an executive, with a wife 
and four children, what does he think of his role as provider versus father? How does he 
spend his spare time? To what clubs and groups does he belong? Does he hunt? What are 
his attitudes toward advertising? What does he read? 

AIO (activities, interests, opinions) inventories, as they are called, reveal vast amounts 
of information concerning attitudes toward product categories, brands within product cat- 
egories, and user and non-user characteristics. Lifestyle studies tend to focus upon how peo- 
ple spend their money; their patterns of work and leisure; their major interests; and their 
opinions of social and political issues, institutions, and themselves. The popularity of lifestyles 
as a basis for market segmentation has prompted several research firms to specialize in 
this area. However, few have achieved the success of VALS and VALS 2 developed by SRI 
International. 



APPROACHING THE MARKET 4 1 

Introduced in 1978, the original VALS (Values, Attitudes, and Lifestyle) divided the 
American population into nine segments, organized along a hierarchy of needs. After several 
years of use, it was detenmned that the nine segments refjected a popuiation dominated by 
people in their twenties and thirties, as the U.S . was ten years ago . Moreover, businesses found 
it difficult to use the segments to predict buying behavior or target consumers. For these rea- 
sons, SRI developed an all-new system, VALS 2. It dropped values and lifestyles as its pri- 
mary basis for its psychographic segmentation scheme. Instead, the forty-three questions ask 
about unchanging psychological stances rather than shifting values and lifestyles. 

The psychographic groups in VALS 2 are alTanged i'l a rectangle (see Figure 2.3). 
They are stacked vertically by their resources (minimal to abundant) an horizontally by their 
self-orientation (principle, status, or action-oriented). 

An annual subscription to VALS 2 provides businesses with a range of products and 
services. Businesses doing market research can include the VALS questions in their ques- 
tionnaire. SRI will analyze the data and VALS-type the respondents. 

Segmenting Organizational Markets 

It is also important for the marketing manager to understand how business or organization 
customers can be segmented. Many firms sell not to ultimate consumers but to other busi- 
nesses. Although there are many similarities between how consumers and businesses behave, 
there are also several differences, as mentioned earlier. Recall that business buyers differ 
as follows: (i) most business buyers view their function as a rational (problem-solving) 
approach; (2) the development of formal procedures, or routines, typifies most business buy- 
ing; (3) there tend to be multiple purchase influences; (4) in industrial buying it is neces- 
sary to maintain the correct assortment of goods in inventory; and (5) it is often the 
responsibility of the purchasing executive to dispose of waste and scrap. 

A number of basic approaches to segmenting organizational markets exist. An indus- 
trial marketing firm must be able to distinguish between the industries it sells to and the dif- 
ferent market segments that exist in each of those industries. There are several basic approaches 
to segmenting organizational markets: (1) types of customers; (2) the Standard Industrial Clas- 
sification; (3) end use; (4) common buying factors; and (5) buyer size and geography. 2, 16 

Type of Customer Industrial customers, both present and potential, can be classi- 
fied into one of three groups, 

1. Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs), such as Caterpillar in the road equip- 
ment industry, 

2. End users, such as farmers who use farm machinery produced by John Deere and 
OEMs. 

3. Aftermarket customers, such as those who purchase spare parts for a piece of 
machinery. 

Similarly, industrial products can be classified into one of three categories, each of 
which is typically sold to only certain types of customers: 

1. Machinery and equipment (e.g., computers, trucks, bulldozers): these are end prod- 
ucts sold only to OEM and end user segments. 

2. Components or subassemblies (e.g. , switches, pistons, machine tool parts): these 
are sold to build and repair machinery and equipment and are sold in all three cus- 
tomer segments. 

J. Materials (e.g., chemicals, metals, herbicides): these are consumed in the end-user 
products and are sold only to OEMs and end users. 



42 CHAPTER 2 UNDERSTANDING AND APPROACHINGTHE MARKET 



Old &New 



The nine original VALS psychographic segments have been replaced by eight new 
psychographic groups. In the new system, the groups are arranged vertically by their 
resources and horizontally by their self-orientation. 




Abundant Resources 



ACTUALIZERS 




Minimal Resources 



STRUGGLERS 



Source: SRI International, Menlo Park, CA 



FIGURE 2.3 VALS and VALS2 are two segmentation techniques. 



APPROACHING THE MARKET 



43 



The Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) A second industrial segmentation 
approach employs the Standard Industrial Classificaticn (SIC) codes published by the U.S. 
Government. The SIC classifies business firms by the main product or service provided. 
Firms are classified into one often basic STC industries. Within each classification, the major 
groups of industries can be identified by the first two numbers of the SIC code. For exam- 
ple, SIC number 22 are textile mills, SIC number 34 are manufacturers of fabricated met- 
als , and so on. An industrial producer would attempt to identify the manufacturing groups 
that represent potential users of the products it produces and sells. Figure 2.4 takes the two- 
digit classification and converts it to three-, four-, five-, and seven-digit codes. As you can 
see in Figure 2.4, use of the SIC code allows the industrial manufacturer to identify the 
organizations whose principal request is, in this case, pliers. 

Based upon this list of construction machinery and equipment products, it is possible to 
determine what products are produced by what manufacturers by consulting one of the fol- 
lowing sources: 

1. Dun's Market Identifiers-computer-based records of three million United States 
and Canad;an business establishments by four-digit SIC. 

2. Metalworking Directory-a comprehensive list of metalworking plants with 20 
or more employees, as well as metal distributors, by four-digit SIC. 

3. Thomas Register of American Manufacturers — a directory of manufacturers, clas- 
sified by products, enabling the researcher to identify most or all of the manu- 
facturers of any given product. 

4. Survey of Industrial Purchasing Power-an annual survey of manufacturing activ- 
ity in the United States by geographic areas and four-digit SIC industry groups; 
reports the number of plants with 20 or more and 100 or more employees, as well 
as total shipment value. 

End uses Sometimes industrial marketers segment markets by looking at how a prod- 
uct is used in different situations. When employing end-use segmentation, the industrial 
marketer typically conducts a costlbenefii analysis for each end-use application. The man- 
ufacturer must ask: What benefits does the customer want from this product? For example, 
an electric motor manufacturer learned that customers operated motors at different speeds. 
After making field visits to gain insight into the situation, he divided the market into slow- 
speed and high-speed segments. In the slow-speed segment, the manufacturer emphasized 
a competitively priced product with a maintenance advantage, while in the high-speed mar- 
ket product, superiority was st-essed. 



Basic 
Industry 
(2 digits) 



SIC 19-39 
Manufacturing 




SIC 34 
Fabricated 

Metal 
Products 



SIC 342 
Cutlery, 

Handtools. 
General 

Hardware 



SIC 3423 
Hand and 
Edge Tool 



Product 
Class 

(5 digits) 



SIC 34231 

Mechanics 

Hand 

Service 

Tools 



Product 
(7 digits) 



SIC3423111 
Pliers 



FIGURE 2.4 SIC two-digit to seven-digit classification 



44 CHAPTER 2 UNDERSTANDING AND APPROACHINGTHE MARKET 



Common Buying Factors Some industrial rrarketers segment markets by identi- 
fying groups of customers who consider the same buy;ng factors impOltant. Five buying 
factors are important in most industrial buying situations: (1) product performance, (2) prod- 
uct quality, (3) service, (4) delivery, and (5) price. 2 Identifying a group of customers who 
value the same buying factors as important is difficult, as industrial organizations' and 
resellers' priorities often change. 

Buyer Size and Geography If organizations' markets cannot be easily segmented 
by one of the previous approaches, market advantages may still be realized by segmenting 
based on account size or geographic boundaries Sales managers have done this for years, 
but only recently have organizations learned to develop several pricing strategies for cus- 
tomers that are both close and far away geographically. Similarly, different strategies can 
be developed for large, medium, and small customers. 

Single-Base and Multi-Base Segmentation 

So far, we have talked about the use of individual bases for market segmentation. The use 
of a single -base segmentation strategy is a simple way to segment markets, and is often 
very effective. Clearly, the use of bases such as sex (cosmetics), or age (health care prod- 
ucts, music), or income (automobiles), provides valuable insights into who uses what prod- 
ucts. But the use of a single base may not be precise enough in identifying a segment for 
which a marketing program can be designed. Therefore, many organizations employ multi- 
base segmentation strategies, using several bases to segment a total market. For example, 
the housing market might be segmented by family size, income, and age. 

American Log Home, for example, offers a wide variety of packages and options to 
its customers based on their needs, incomes, skills, family size, and usage. Packages range 
from one-room shelters designed primarily for hunters to a 4,000 square-foot unit complete 
with hot tub, chandeliers, and three decks. Customers can select to finish part of the inte- 
rior, part of the exterior, or to have the entire structure finished by American Log Home. 

The resulting huge array of products is adisadvantage of multi-base segmentation as 
a strategy. Using several bases that vary in importance, considering all to be equal, could 
produce misdirected efforts. 

Qualifying Customers in Market Segments 

Clearly, it is important to employ appropriate factors to identify market segments. Equally 
important is qualifying the customers who make up those segments. Qualifications involves 
judgment. Marketers must be able to differentiate between real prospects and individuals 
or firms who have some similar characteristics but cannot be converted to purchasers. 

It should be clear that not all market segments present desirable marketing opportu- 
nities. Traditionally, five criteria have been employed to gauge the relative worth of a mar- 
ket segment: 16 

1 . Clarity o/ identification: The degree to which we can identify who is in and who 
is outside the segment. Part of this process also involves the delineation of demo- 
graphic and social characteristics that make it easier to measure and track the iden- 
tified segment. Unfortunately, obtaining segment data is not always easy, especially 
when the segment is defined in terms of behavioral or benefit characteristics. Sex 
is a clear basis for segmenting a product such as brassieres. 

7. Actual or potential need: Needs that reflect overt demands for existing goods and 
services, or needs that can be transformed into perceived wants through educa- 



APPROACHING THE MARKET 45 

don or persuasion, constitute a segment. It is further assumed that this need exists 
in a large enough quantity to justify a separate segmentation strategy. This crite- 
rion requires the ability to measure both the intensity of the need and the strength 
of the purchasing power supporting it. A 40-story building has a clear need for 
elevators . 

3. Effective demand: It is not enough for an actual or potential need to exist; pur- 
chasing power must also exist. Needs plus purchasing power create effective 
demand. The ability to buy stems from income, savings, and credit. Purchasing 
power derived from one or more of these three sources must belong to the mem- 
bers of a market segment in order for it to represent a meaningful marketing oppor- 
tunity. The possession of a valid Visa or other credit card meets this criteria for 
most products. 

4. Economic accessibility: The individuals in a market segment must be reachable 
and profitable. For example, segments could be concentrated geographically, shop 
at the same stores, or read the same magazines. Regrettably, many important 
segments-those based on motivational characteristics, for instance- cannot be 
reached economically. The elderly rich represent such a segment. 

5. Positive response: A segment must react uniquely to marketing efforts. There must 
be a reason for using different marketing approaches in the various segments. Dif- 
ferent segments, unless they respond in unique ways to particular marketing inputs, 
hardly justify the use of separate marketing programs. 



The Strategy of Market Segmentation 

During the last two decades, a more complete and concise understanding of market seg- 
mentation has emerged. This is not to say that there are not still unsettled issues, meas- 
urement problems, and other issues to consider. The most severe problem remains the 
difficulty of defining precisely the basis for segmentation. A great deal of knowledge about 
the market and considerable experience with it are highly desirable. Research into consumer 
motivation is essential. This does not mean that historical, descriptive data about consumers 
are no longer important. Nevertheless, the ultimate purpose of going through the process 
of delineating market segments is to select a target market or markets: otherwise, the seg- 
mentation process is worthless. 

The segmental approach will be described throughout the text in greater detail. At 
this point, it is sufficient to know that the segmentation strategy is the primary marketing 
approach used by a majority of producers. Combined with product differentiation, it is the 
essence of a contemporary marketing strategy. The activity of selecting a target market 
involves five steps: 

1 . Identify relevant person/organization and purchase situation variables beyond the 
core product variable. (For Minolta's Maxxum SLR Camera, the core product vari- 
able would be fool-proof photographs, and other relevant variables might be age, 
income, family composition, occasion for use, and photographic experience.) 

2. Collect and analyze other related data about potential segments (e.g., character- 
istics of neophyte camera users, price perceptions of these potential users, size of 
group, trends, minimum product features). 

3 . Apply criteria of a good segment. 



46 CHAPTER 2 UNDERSTANDING AND APPROACHING THE MARKET 



Select one or more segments as target markets (e.g., neophyte photographers, frus- 
trated with neccessary adjustments for a 35mm camera, income of $35,000 or more, 
family, between 25-45 years of age, male). 

Develop appropliate action programs to reach target segment(s) (e.g., price at $350; 
distribute through discount stores, camera stores, and department stores; promote 
through TV and magazine ads). This type of effective action program is demon- 
strated in the Newsline that follows. 



NEWSLINE: YOUTH SEGMEIV7S 

It takes more than just traditional advertising to appeal to the ever- 
elUSive teenage market. One company that has discovered the right 
formula to reach this group is High Frequency Marketing (HFMJ, a 
youth marketing firm founded by Ron Vos. Since its inception in 
1995, HFM has grown significantly in terms of cross-industry reach, 
marketing network, and revenue (which has tripled in the past two 
years). Vas attributes the company's success to its unconventional 
pfOmotional campaigns. 

As a youth marketing start-up, Vas's energies were initially focused 
on the music industry. He appealed to his target market of 12- to 26- 
year-aids by using grassroots marketing efforts and specializing in 
"takin' it to the streets." Back in 1995, street marketing had not 
become the cliche that it is now. Yet. Vas's key to success is the 
adaptability of his firm to youth culture and technology. As he likes 
to say, "As soon as a marketing concept becomes m2instream, it's 
history," 

When asked to pinpoint a breakthrough campaign for his com- 
pany, Vos immediately mentions The Wedding Singer. Hired by New 
Line Cinema in 1998 to promote the film, HFM developed the concept 
of a "karaoke jam contest" in the malls of 24 cities The campaign was 
immensely successful, opening doors for HFM to the whole entertain- 
ment industry. 

Another successful campaign took place in 2000, when Food.com 
approached HFM with the concept of partnering with Second Harvest 
(a national food bank) to sponsor a national food drive on college 
campuses, using the incentive of awarding the campus that collected 
the most food at a big concert. HFM had to go back to the company 
and say that "you can put a carrot on the end of a stick, but the stick 
can't be too lang." In other words, Food.com needed a more tangible 
campaign, something with instant feedback to "show (the students) 
that it's real, that it's there." Vos and his creative marketing team 
came up with a compilation CD entitled "Music 4 Food," whiCh was 
distributed free of charge to students who donated food (they also 
received a ticket to a nearby concert). 

Sources: Debra Goldman. "S&Sr Markets the Tried and True to Teen Boys: 
Misogyny," Adweek, May 15, 2000, p. 24; Jinnefer Gilbert, "New Teen Obses- 
sion," Advertising Age, February 14, 2000, p. 38; Chrtstina Merrill, "The Ripple 
Effect Reaches Gen Y." American Demographics, November 1999, pp. 15-16; 
Lauren Goldstein, "The Alpha Teenager," Fortune, December 20, 1999, pp. 
201-203. 



APPROACHING THE MARKET 



47 



The Concept of Positioning 

Both product diffefentiation and market segmentation result in a perceived position for the 
company or organization. From the intelligent marketing organization, there should be an 
attempt to create the desired position, rather than wait for it to be created by customers, the 
public, or even competitors. Positioning is defined as the act of designing the company's 
offering and image to occupy a distinctive place in the target market's mind. The end result 
of positioning is the successful creation of a market-focused value proposition, a cogent 
reason why the target market should buy the product. 

Since positioning is a strategy that starts with the product, we expand our discussion 
of positioning in the Product Chapter. 

The Future of the Marketplace 

As the spread of the global marketplace continues , aided by satellites, the World Wide Web, 
and univeral problems, it will also become increasingly difficult to effectively assess the 
market. In fact, there is solid evidence that the market will often consist of a single person 
or company. Customized product design, relationship marketing, and one-on-one market- 
ing suggests that mark.eting has gone full circle. Like the first half of the twentieth century, 
when the comer grocer knew all of his customers personally, marketing in the rest of the 
twenty-first century may look very similar. 



Bases of segmentation 

a. Ultimate Consumers 

1. Geographic 

2. Demographics 

3. Usage 

4. Psychological 

b. Organizations 

1. Type of customer 

2. End uses 

3. Common buying factors 

4. Size and geography 



c. Single-base versus multi-base 

d. Qualify people into segments 

1. Clarity of identification 

2. Actual or potential need 

3. Effective demand 

4. Economic accessibility 

5. Positive response 

e. Segmentation process 




THE WALL STREET JOURNAL. 



IN PRACTICE 

What is the market? It depends on 
your product but, generally, all 
markets possess similar, basic char- 
acteristics. The market is people, 
either individuals or groups, busi- 
nesses or institutions. The market is 
also a place, as in marketplace, 
where transactions take place. 
Finally, the market is an economic 
entity, influenced by financial pres- 
sures and government regulations. 

In order to sell a product, mar- 
keters must know their market and 
know it well. Four primary markets 
exist, but they are not mutually 
exclusive. Consumer, industrial, 
institutional, and reseller markets 
all have characteristics specific to 
their consumers, but they also over- 
lap in many instances. As a resull, 
most successful companies segment 
their markets. By segmenting mar- 
kets, a company can match the 
needs and wants of consumers to 
its product. 

Print magazines and their 
online counterparts are excellent 
examples of market segmenting. 
The Interactive lournal targets the 
business community, while Outside 
Magazine (www.outsidemag.com). 
clearly targets outdoor enthusiasts. 

You are able to customize the 
Interactive lournal to your per- 
sonal preferences. On the Front 
Section, click on Personal Journal 
on the main menu. From here you 
will be directed to the Setup 
Center. Here, you can create fold- 
ers in three separate areas: 

1. News 

2. Favorites 

3. Portfolio 

In the News section, you can search 
for news items in the Interactive 



lournal using key words, company 
names, and industry type. Articles 
meeting the criteria you specify will 
be listed automatically on a daily 
basis. Set up your own News folder 
now. 

In the Favorites section, you 
can track regularly running 
columns and features in the major 
sections such as Marketplace and 
Tech Center. Create your own 
Favorites folder now. 

In the Portfolio section, you 
can track your purchases and sales 
of specific stocks. 

DELIVERABLE 

Identify three to Lve companies 
with segmented markets. Visit their 
websites for specific information 
about the companies and their 
products. Also search the Interac- 
tive lournal for more in'ormation 
about the companies you have 
identified. For each company, iden- 
tify the segmented market and list 
specific characteristics about that 
market. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 

1. What are the advantages of 
identifying and selling to seg- 
mented markets versus 
broader, general markets? 

2. How do companies identify the 
market most likely to buy their 
products? 

3. Describe why market segment- 
ing helps the companies yOll 
identified in your Deliverable 
sell their products. 

4. How can you use the Tnterac- 
tive JO'lrnal to learn more 
about markets? 



48 



MARKETER'S VOCABULARY 49 



SUMMARY 



The concept of a market was examined in this chapter. It was defined from three perspectives: peo- 
ple, place, and economic activity. In addition, the four types of markets were discussed. The bulk of 
this chapter dealt with the two general marketing approaches toward the market: undifferentiated (aggre- 
gated) and segmental. The former was defined as the assumption that the market is homogeneous 
and developing separate strategies is unnecessary. The latter was defined as the acknowledgement 
that markets contain sub markets known as segments, which must be evaluated as potential target mar- 
kets. The remainder of the chapter highlighted various bases for segmenting markets and delineating 
the criteria employed in assessing the value of a segment. 



MARKETER'S VOCABULARY 



Market aggregation (undifferentiated marketing) Treating an entire market uniformly, making 
little or no attempt to differentiate marketing effort. 

Product differentiation A marketing strategy that emphasizes distinctive product features with- 
out recognizing diversity of consumer needs. 

Market segmentation Dividing a total market into several submarkets or segments, each of 
which is homogeneous in all significant aspects, for the purpose of selecting one or more target 
markets on which to concentrate marketing effort. 

Concentration strategy Used by an organization that chooses to focus its marketing efforts on 
only one market segment. 

Multisegment strategy Used by an organization that chooses to focus its marketing effort on 
two or more distinct segments. 

Ultimate user An individual or organization that buys and/or uses products or services for their 
own personal consumption. 

Industrial user An organization that buys products or services for use in their own businesses, 
or to make other products. 

Demographic characteristics Statistical characteristics of a population often used to segment 
markets, such as age, sex, family lifecycle, income, or education. 

Usage rate A segmentation base that identifies customers on the basis of the frequency of use of 
a product. 

Purchase occasion A segmentation base that identifies when they use the product. 

User status A segmentation base that identifies customers on the basis of patterns of use, such as 
one-time or regular use. 

Loyalty A segmentation base that identifies customers on the basis of purchase patterns of par- 
ticular brands. 

Stage of readiness A segmentation base that identifies customers on the basis of how ready a 
customer is to buy. 

Psychological segmentation The use of attitudes, personality, motives, and lifestyle to identify 
customers. 

Attitude A predisposition to behave in a certain way to a given stimuli. 

Personality All the traits of a person that make himlher unique. 



50 CHAPTER 2 UNDERSTANDING AND APPROACHING THE MARKET 

Motive A reason for behavior. 

Lifestyle A pattern of attitudes, interests, and opinions held by a person. 

Organizational markets A market consisting of those organizations who buy products or serv- 
ices for their businesses, for use in making other products, or for resale. 

Standard industrial classification (SIC) A U.S . government publication that classifies business 
firms by the main product or service provided. 

Single-base segmentation strategy The use of a single base to segment markets. 

Multi-base segmentation strategy The use of two or more bases to segment markets. 

Clarity of identification The degree to which one can identify those inside and those outside the 
market segment. 

Actual need Overt demand for existing goods or services. 

Potential need A need that can be changed into perceived wants through such means as educa- 
tion or persuasion. 

Effective demand Actual or potential needs existing along with purchasing power (income, sav- 
ings, and credit) belonging to members of a market segment. 

Economic accessibility Members of a market segment must be reachable and profitable. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 

1. What makes the concept of market segmentation different from that of product differentiation? 

2. What are the advantages that market segmentation has over aggregate or mass marketing? 

3. What criteria would you use to determine whether the toothpaste market should be grouped into 
a "drinker's toothpaste" segment? A "business person's toothpaste" segment? 

4. Why is demographic segmentation alone not always a sufficient means of target market identi- 
fication? Suggest a better method. 

5. Assume that you have been hired by a film to segment the market for replacement tires. What 
segmentation bases would you use? What pitfalls should you be suspicious of? 

6. List the steps in the market segmentation process. 

7. Describe the means by which industrial reseller markets can be segmented. 

8. Segmentation is really an aggregation process. Explain. 

9. Is a multi-base segmentation approach always better than the use of a single segmentation base? 

10. Do you think that there are distinct market segments for personal computers? If so, what are the 
characteristics? If not, why not? 



CASE APPLICATION 51 



PROJECT 



Go through a cross-section of consumer and business magazines. Clip out ads that you feel represent 
at least five bases for segmentation. Select one and apply the criteria of a valid segment. Write a two- 
page report. 



CASE APPLICATION 



ROLLING ROCK FINDS ITS NICHE 

On the back of each long-neck bottle of Rolling Rock beer, a bold but simple "33" stands out. Plain 
white on the dark green glass, the number sits enclosed in quotation marks, squarely below a block 
of type, daring the drinker to discover its meaning. 

Since] 939, when the brew from Latrobe, Pennsylvania, made its debut, that "33" has been 
captwing the imagination of consumers. Fans of the beer steadily wrote Latrobe Brewing Co., try- 
ing to discern the significance of the number. Theories abound, but if anybody knows the real story, 
they haven't told-which only adds to the "33" mystique. 

This natural marketing hook, however, remained untapped for most of the beer's history. The 
company rarely ran promotions and its advertising did little to bolster the "33" myth. Rolling Rock 
was just another beer saddled with a blue-collar image, and in the white-collar 1980s sales began to 
decline steadily. 

Things began to change for Rolling Rock in mid-1987, when Labatt's USA acquired Latrobe 
Brewing. The new owner, who recognized a good thing, brought in a Dallas-based promotions agency, 
The Marketing Continuum, and ad agency, Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulous, to take advantage 
of the "33" legend. 

The agencies believed that by playing up the number, they could preserve the brand's unique 
personality. They also sought to reposition Rolling Rock as a super-premium brand and saw "33" as 
the vital link to its long history, distinctive packaging, and special aura. 

How successful has the new strategy been? Sales during the first two months climbed fifteen 
percent from the same peliod a year earlier. The repositioning has also paid off nicely. The brand's 
primary audience is no longer college students and blue-collar workers. The demographic on today's 
average Rolling Rock consumer shows a 21 to 35-year-old white-collar male earning $40,000 or more 
per year. 

David Mullen, executive at TMC, says it was clear early in his company's relationship with 
Rolling Rock that the kind of "me too" bikini advertising, which has homogenized so many of the 
major beers, would be a poor direction for this brand. That's because Rolling Rock was a niche brand 
trying to capture the attention of consumers and distributors in a saturated market. The marketing 
minds behind Rolling Rock, Mullen says, saw a window of opportunity in the super-premium seg- 
ment, where brands like Michelob and Lowenbrau were losing their allure with consumers who wanted 
something unique. So Mullen and his cohorts devised a successful program that continues to stress 
the "specialness" of the brand. 
Source: Kathy Thacker. "Solutions: Winning Number," Adweek (October 28, 1999): pp. 40—41. 

Questions : 

1. Despite the apparent success of this new marketing strategy designed by TMC, there are poten- 
tial problems with the segmentation approach employed. Discuss these problems. 

2. Discuss other possible bases for segmentation that Rolling Rock could have used. 



52 CHAPTER 2 UNDERSTANDING AND APPROACHING THE MARKET 

REFERENCES 



1. Alvin A. Achenbaulll, "Advertising Doesn't Manipulate Con- 
sumerism," Journal ofAdvenising Research, April 1972, p. 7. 

2. B. Charles Ames and James D. Hlavacek, Managing Marketing for 
Industrial Firms, New York, N.Y.: Random House, pp. 96- 103. 

3. Ames, p. 102. 

4. Betsy D. Belb, "Discovering the 65+ Consumer," Business Horizons, 
May-June 1982, pp. 42-46. 

5. Alfred S. Boote, "Market Segmentation by Personal Values and 
Salient Product Attributes," Journal of Advertising Research, Vol. 21, 
No. I, February 198 I, pp. 29- 35. 

6. Kenneth Boulding, Economic Analysis, New York, N.Y.: Harper & 
Row, Inc, 1995, pp. 608-615. 

7. William R. Darden, W.A. French, and RD. Howell, "Mapping Mar- 
ket Mobility: Psychographic Proliles and Media Exposure," Journal 
of Business Research, Vol. 7, No. 8, 1979, pp. 51-74. 

8. Duane L. Davis and Ronald S. Rubin, "Identifying the Energy- 
Conscious Consumer: The Case of the Opinion Leader," Journal of 
the Academy of Marketing Science, Spring 1983, p. 185. 

9. Ten-y Elrod and Russel S. Winer, "An Empirical Evaluation of Aggre- 
gation Approaches for Developing Market Segments," Journal ofMar- 
keiing Vol. 46, No.4, Fall 1982, pp. 32-34. 



10. RonaJd Frank, William Massey, and Yoram Wind, Market Segmen- 
tation, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1972. 

11. Martha Farns worth, "Psychographies for the 1990s," American Demo- 
graphics, July 1989, pp. 25, 28-30. 

12. H.H. Kassarjian, "Personality and Consumer Behavior: A Review," 
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 8, November 1971. 

13. William D. Wells, "Psychographies: A Critical Review," Journal 0/ 
Marketing Research, May 1975, pp. 196-213. 

14. Joseph T. Plummer, "The Concept and Application of Life Style Seg- 
mentation," Journal o/Marketing, January 1974, p. 33. 

15. David J. Reibstein, Christopher H. Lovelock, and Ricardo de P. Dob- 
son, "The Direction of Causality Between Perceptions, Affect, and 
Behavior: An Application to Travel Behavior," Journal of Consumer 
Research, Vol 6., March 1980, pp. 370-376. 

16. Benson P. Shapiro and Thomas Y. Bonoma, "How to Segment Indus- 
trial Markets," Harvard Business Review, May-June 1984, pp. 
104-110. 



CHAPTER3 



MARKETING RESEARCH: AN AID TO 
DECISION MAKING 



LEARNING OBJECTIVES 



Having completed this chapter, you should' 

Understand the role of marketing research . 

Understand the marketing research process and the techniques 

employed . 



DISCOVERING WHY THEY CHEW 



JUiCY Fruit Gum, the oldest brand of the Wm. Wrigley Jr. Company, wasn't chew- 
ing up the teen market, gum's top demographic. In 1997, the company found itself under 
pressure from competitors. Sales and market share were down. How could Wrigley make 
more kids chomp on Juicy Fruit? 

What qualities about Juicy Fruit might appeal to teens? Wrigley went to the source 
to find out. It found kids who chew five sticks or more of Juicy Fruit each week and 
promptly gave them a homework assignment. Find pictures that remind them of the gum 
and write a short story about it. From the focus group, Wrigley learned that teens chew 
Juicy Fruit because it's sweet. It refreshes and energizes them. 

Their ad agency, BBDO, confirmed what the teens were saying. BBDO asked 
more than 400 heavy gum chewers to rate various brands by attributes that best repre- 
sented them. For Juicy Fruit, respondents picked phrases such as "has the right amount 
of sweetness" and "is made with natural sweetness." 

Another study by BBDO looked into why teens chew gum. Was it because they're 
stressed out- or because they forgot to brush their teeth before going to school? Nearly 
three out of four kids said they stick a wad into their mouth when they crave something 
sweet. And Juicy Fruit was the top brand they chose to fulfill that need (Big Red was a 
distant second). 

Sources: "How Sweet It Is," American Demographics, March 2000, p, S 18; "Flavor du Jour," American Demographics, March 
2000, p, SI0; Erika Rasmusson, "Cool for Sale," Sales & Marketing Management , March 1998, pp. 20-22, 



INTRODUCTION 



Although the marketing research conducted by the Wrigley Co. was fairly simple, it pro- 
vided a new direcLion for their marketing strategy. BBDO developed four TV commercials 



53 



54 CHAPTER 3 MARKETING RESEARCH: AN AIDTO DECISION MAKING 



Situation 
analysis 



Goaf 
setting 



jvlarketing 
strategy 



Implementation 



Evaluating 
results 



Marketing 
research 



FIGURE 3.1 The marketing planning process 



with the "Gatta Have Sweet" theme. Rougilly 70 percent of respondents voluntarily recalled 
the Juicy Fruit name after watching the commercial (the average recaJT for a brand of sugar 
gum is 57 percent). Sales of 100-stick boxes of Juicy Fruit rose 5 percent after the start of 
the ad campaign, reversing a 2 percent decline prior to it. Juicy Fruit's market share also 
increased from 4.9 percent to 5.3 percent, the biggest gain of any established chewing gum 
brand during the year following the campaign. 

Marketing research addresses the need for quicker, yet more accurate, decision mak- 
ing by the marketer. The impetus for this situation is the complex relationship between the 
business firm and the ever-changing external environment. In particular, most marketers are 
far removed from their customers ; yet must know who their customers are, what they want, 
and what competitors are doing. Often the marketer relies on salespeople and dealers for 
information, but more and more the best source of information is marketing research. 

It should be noted that most marketing decisions are still made without the use of 
formal marketing research. In many cases, the time required to do marketing research is 
not available. In other cases, the cost of obtaining the data is prohibitive or the desired data 
cannot be obtained in reliable form. Ultimately, successful marketing executives make deci- 
sions on the basis of a blend of facts and intuition. 

In this chapter, we provide an overview of the marketmg research process. We start 
the discussion with a look at business information. As noted in Figure 3.1, marketing research 
is applicable throughout the marketing planning process. 



THE NATURE AND IMPORTANCE 
OF MARKETING RESEARCH 



Informal and, by today's standards, crude attempts to analyze the market date back to the 
earliest days of the marketing revolution. Only in recent years, however, has the role of 
research as it relates to management been clearly recognized. 

Reflecting this change in orientation, the following definition of marketing research 
is offered: marketing research is the scientific and controlled gathering of nonroutine mar- 



WHAT NEEDS RESEARCHING IN MARKETING? 55 

keting information undertaken to help management solve marketing problems. There is often 
hearty disagreement over the answer to the question of whether marketing research is a sci- 
ence. One's answer depends on the employed definition of "science." To be specific, a research 
activity should use the scientific method. In this method, hypotheses (tentative statements 
of relationships or of solutions to problems) are drawn from informal observations. These 
hypotheses are then tested. Ultimately, the hypothesis is accepted, rejected, or modified 
according to the results of the test. In a true science, verified hypotheses are turned into 
"jaws." In marketing research, verified hypotheses become the generalizations upon which 
management develops its marketing programs. (To simplify our discussion, we will use "ques- 
tions" as a synonym of "hypothesis.") 

The mechanics of marketing research must be controlled so that the right facts are 
obtained in the answer to the correct problem. The control of fact-finding is the responsi- 
bility of the research director, who must correctly design the research and carefully super- 
vise its execution to ensure that it goes according to plan. Maintaining control in marketing 
research is often difficult because of the distance that separates the researcher and the mar- 
ket and because the services of outsiders are often required to complete a research project, i 



WHAT NEEDS RESEARCHING IN MARKETING? 



An easy, and truthful, answer to this question is "Everything." There is no aspect of mar- 
keting to which research cannot be applied. Every concept presented in this marketing text 
and every element involved in the marketing management process can be subjected to a 
great deal of careful marketing research. One convenient way to focus attention on those 
matters that especially need researching is to consider the elements involved in marketing 
management. Many important questions relating to the consumer can be raised. Some are: 

• Who is/are the customer(s)? 

• What does he/she desire in the way of satisfaction? 

• Where does he/she choose to purchase? 

• Why does he/she buy, or not buy? 

• When does he/she purchase? 

• How does he/she go about seeking satisfaction in the market? 

Another area where research is critical is profits. Two elements are involved. First, 
there is the need to forecast sales and related costs- resulting in profits. Second, there is 
the necessity to plan a competitive marketing program that will produce the desired level 
of .sales at an appropriate cost. Sales forecasting is the principal tool used in implementing 
the profit-direction element in the marketing management concept. Of course, the analy- 
sis of past sales and interpretation of cost information are important in evaluation of per- 
formance and provide useful facts for future planning. 

A great deal of marketing research is directed toward rather specialized areas of man- 
agement. These activities are broken down into five major areas of marketing research. Briefly, 
these activities are: 

1 . Research on markets- market trends, market share, market potentials, market char- 
acteristics, completion, and other market intelligence. 

2. Research on sales-sales analysis, sales forecasting, quota-setting, sales territory 
design, sales performance measurement, trade channels, distribution costs, and 
inventories. 



56 CHAPTER 3 MARKETING RESEARCH: AN AID TO DECISION MAKING 



3. Research on products-new product research, product features, brand image, con- 
cept tests, product tests, and market tests. (See the following Newsline.) 

4. Research on advertising andpromotion-promotion concepts, copy research, media 
research, merchandising, packaging, adve;tising effectiveness measurement. 

5. Research on corporate growth and development— econorrUc and technological fore- 
casting, corporate planning inputs, corporate image, profitability measurement, 
merger and acquisition studies, and facilities location. 



NEWSLINE: HOW EXECS USE RESEARCH 

Creating and introducing new products is the most important 
research priority among marketing executives. The Marketing Science 
Institute of Cambridge, Massachusetts, surveyed 160 executives from 
its sponsoring organizations. The executives, representing 60 major 
consumer and industrial goods and services corporations, were asked 
to divide 100 points among several research areas. 

After successful new product introductions, the executives said 
that market orientation and customer relationships are the next most 
important areas Those issues displaced improving the use of market- 
ing information and measuring brand eqUity as the second- and 
third-highest concerns, respectively, in the previous survey. 

"The new research priorities indicate that a shift is taking place in 
marketing practice," notes Donald Lehmann, executive director of the 
institute. "Market orientation has taken hold and the increasing 
power of the consumer is apparent in the movement away from prod- 
uct-driven strategies. Marketers also realize that they need to make 
choices about who their customers should be and whose needs they 
are best equipped to meet . . . and most significantly, they are looking 
for better ways to anticipate adoption and diffusion of really new 
products." Said Marni Clippenger, communications director at MSI, 
"Companies seem to be shifting away from using the brand to really 
figuring out what customers want." 

Source: Rachel Rosenthal. "New Products Reign as Research Priority," Adver- 
tising Age, August 8. 1994, p. 26; Robert McMath, 'To Test or Not To Test," 
American Demographics, June 1998, p. 64; John McManus, "Mission Invisi- 
ble," American Demographics, Marcb 1999, p. 6. 



1. Marketing research is the scientific and cont(Qlled gath- 2. Any business that is consumer-oriented will benefit from 

ering of nonroutine marketing information undertaken to marketing research. 

help management solve marketing problems. 3. Research can be applied to every facet of marketing. 



PROCEDURES ANDTECHNIOUES IN MARKETING RESEARCH 



57 



Sales forecasts 
Cost forecasts 
Product testing 
Consumer needs 
Consumer attitudes 
Consumer product usage 
Market size/trends 
Product replacement 



Demographic trends 

Legislative impact 

Price testing 

Marketing communication testing 

Channel locations 

Competition 

Psychographic trends 

Environmental trends 



FIGURE 3.2 Areas of research application 



PROCEDURES ANDTECHNIQUES 
IN MARKETING RESEARCH 



Considering the relatively short span of time in which marketing research has developed 
since the 1930s, it is quite remarkable that so sophisticated and thorough a collection of 
procedures and techniques should have been developed. In many respects, marketing research 
has advanced faster than any other specialized area in marketing management. In view of 
the highly specialized nature of marketing research, it is not possible in this discussion to 
present more than an outline of the basic procedures and techniques . 

It is important for a marketing manager to be familiar with the basic procedures and 
techniques of marketing research. It is true that many businesspeople will never have occa- 
sion to engage personally in marketing research. However, it is quite likely that they will 
be faced with a need either to supervise an internal marketing research activity or to work 
with an outside marketing research firm. The manager who understands the research func- 
tion is in a position to judge intelligently the proposals made by research specialists and to 
evaluate their findings and recommendations . Occasionally, the manager herself will have 
to seek solutions to marketing problems. It may not be possible to obtain the services of 
marketing research specialists. The manager familiar with the basic procedures of fact-find- 
ing in marketing should be able to supervise a reasonably satisfactory search for the infor- 
mation required. 

There is no single set of steps in a market research procedure that is accepted by all. 
Indeed, each marketing research problem requires, to some degree, its own peculiar pro- 
cedure. However, there is general agreement that four major activities should be performed 
in a thorough marketing research project. These are: (1) making a preliminary investiga- 
tion; (2) creating the research design; (3) conducting the investigation; and (4) processing 
the data/reporting results (see Figure 3.3)2 



Making a Preliminary Investigation 

There are two phases of activity in the preliminary investigation. The first of these involves 
the determination of the purpose and scope of the research. The second involves an inves- 
tigation into the marketing environment called the informal assessment. 

Determining the Purpose and Scope of the Research 

The basic and critical problem in marketing research is seldom the problem that appears 
on the surface. It is therefore necessary to explore beneath the surface to ascertain the nature 
and size of the problem. This is the vital first step and must be done correctly, since every 
subsequent phase of the project is directed at solving the basic problem. For the research 



58 



CHAPTER 3 MARKETING RESEARCH: AN AIDTO DECISION MAKING 





Conduct 
preliminary 
investigation 
























Purpose/scope 
of research 




Informal 
assessment 












Create the 
research design 








Approach 






HI 














Types of data 








■ 






Conduct 
the research 




> 






Sources of data 




v 




" 






Collection 
method 




Process 
the data 








,f 






Selecting 
the sample 




V 








1 




Report 
the results 




Anticipating 
results 



FIGURE 3.3 The marketing research process 

to be worthwhile (indeed, for it not to be a waste of resources) , the problem must be stated 
clearly and correctly. Failure to do so is the most serious of mistakes in this project. 

Correctly defining the research problem should lead to the establishment of the research 
parameters. A research study could be restricted by function (advertising); customer group 
(heavy users); market (Far East); and time frame (1999-2001). Because research is so costly, 
it is imperative that parameters are established and maintained. 



The Informal Assessment 

The second important phase of the preliminary investigation is calied the informal assess- 
ment. This is an unstructured search of the marketing environment. It enables the researcher 
to become familiar with the problem setting. This is particularly important for the outside 
consultant who needs to become acquainted with the company, its customers, its products, 
and all of the marketing conditions surrounding the problems. But it is also wise for the 
company researcher to refresh hislher knowledge of those internal factors bearing on the 
problem and also to discover the external elements irvolved. 

The informal investigation goes beyond merely "getting acquainted" with the prob- 
lem and its marketing setting, however. The final result of the preliminary investigation is 
the creation of a set of research questions. In marketing research, theses questions can be 
stated as a tentative explanation of the problem that the research is designed to solve. For 
example, if a marketing manager is trying to solve a problem that involves an important 
loss of market share in a particular area of the country, an informal investigation might reveal 
three possible reasons for the decline in market position. These reasonj, until verified by 
thorough study, can best be stated as research statements : 



PROCEDURES ANDTECHNIQUES IN MARKETING RESEARCH 59 

1 . The decline in market share is the result of increased competitive advertising in 
the area. 

2. The decline in market share is the result of the te::t marketing of a new product 
by a major competitor. 

3. The decline in market share is the result of "stock outs" at the retail level caused 
by a trucking strike in the area. 

In attempting to verify one or more of these hypothetical statements, the researcher exam- 
ines company records to uncover new sources of information or to discover relationships 
in old data with bearing on the current problem. Interviews with company executives and 
operating personnel are often conducted. Interviews are also conducted with various per- 
sons outside the company whose opinions might be expected to have some relevance to the 
problem. The preliminary search is always limited to obtaining an insight into the problem 
and into possible, solutions for it. 

in the final phase of the preliminary investigation, the researcher analyzes the results 
he has so far obtained and restates them in the form of research questions to be tested in 
the subsequent research steps. 

Creating the Research Design 

The design of a marketing research project is the plan proposed for testing the research ques- 
tions as well as collecting and processing infoITiation. The administratioD of the project 
according to the design insures that the fact-finding process will be adequately controlled. 
"Design" means more than simply using good market research procedures. Every research 
project should be individually designed to produce the kinds of information needed to solve 
a particular problem. For this reason, nc two market research projects are ever exactly alike. 3 
Six steps are involved in creating a research design: choosing the approach, deter- 
mining types of data needed, locating data sources, choosing a method of collecting data, 
selecting the sample, and anticipating/collecting the results. 

Choosing the Approach Three alternative approaches are possible in creating a 
research design. They are not mutually exclusive, but in most cases, the design of a research 
plan is limited to the use of one of the three. 

The first approach is the experimental approach. This approaCh requires that certain 
procedural rules must be followed. Essentially, the variable of interest— e.g., price, message- 
must be manipulated and everyone participating in the experiment must have a known and 
equal chance of being selected. 

In a market experiment, information relating to the basic problem is obtained through 
the use of a small-scale simulated program designed to test a specific research hypothesis. 
Suppose, for example, that we wish to test the question \k\dX families of similar size and 
economic characteristics living in three different cities purchase different amounts ofapar- 
ticidar formula of a soft drink, such as Dr. Pepper. The first step would be to establish the 
research question: "For a given t;me period, the average fluid ounces of a Formula A, B, 
or C purchase in each city were the same." Next, a sample of the families in each city would 
be selected and randomly assigned either A. B, or C. Next, a survey would be taken to deter- 
mine the number of ounces purchased by each family. Once this was done, a statistical test 
would be used to test the research question. If statistically significant differences in pur- 
chases of Formula A, B, or C of Dr. Pepper were noted, it could be concluded that taste 
does influence the amount of this soft drink purchased by families with the same social and 
economic characteristics. Of course, other hypotheses about soft drink purchasing could 



60 CHAPTER 3 MARKETING RESEARCH: AN AIDTO DECISION MAKING 



also have been tested using a slightly different method. For example, the effect of televi- 
sion advertising on the purchase of Dr. Pepper might have been studied by inspecting pur- 
chases in two or more cities that are in the same general area of the country (such as the 
Southwest) but in which different levels of television advertising had been used. 

The second approach is the historical. In this approach, reliance is placed on past expe- 
riences in r.eeking solutions to marketing problems. Historical marketing facts are relevant 
only to the degree that they can be projected into the future. Fortunately, in many areas of 
marketing, this can be done with a good deal of confidence. Certain types of changes, such 
as populations and income distribution, come about rather slowly. The day-to-day effect of 
these changes on marketing is almost imperceptible. Projections of future population, gross 
national product, and consumer purchasing power are practically foolproof. Historical analy- 
ses of such factors as consumer behavior, competitive selling tactics, and distributors' buy- 
ing practices tend also to be fairly reliable indicators of future behavior by these same 
marketing components. Often, it is possible to trace the experience of organizations simi- 
lar to yours and assess how they dealt with similar problems. There are literally hundreds 
of case studies on companies such as Microsoft that are useful to many business functions. 
Learning from the mistakes of others makes good business sense. 

The third approach that can be used in designing a marketing research plan is the sur- 
vey approach. In the survey approach, marketing infonnation is collected either from obser- 
vation or by questionnaire or interview. I n contrast to the experimental and historical method?:, 
in which the data are more or less directly related to the problem, the survey approach nec- 
essarily involves far more subjectivity and intuition on the part of the researcher.--.;yalch- 
ing a customer make a purchase of a new TV reveals something about his motives: amply 
asking him why he is buying it is much better. Drawing conclusions from either observa- 
tions of behavior or from the opinions offered by a respondent create important insig;lts. 
The survey method is flexible. It can be adapted to almost any type of research design. For 
this reason, and because of the difficulties in creating marketing experiments and in col- 
lecting pertinent historical data, the survey approach is the most often used in marketing 
research. 

Determining the Types of Data Needed Three types of data are used: facts, opin- 
ions, and motivational information. The types of data required are partly identified by the 
nature of the problem to be solved. For instance, if the problem relates to production and 
inventory scheduling, the facts that are needed relate to market and sales potential. On the 
other hand, if the problem revolves around the choice between two new products, the opin- 
ions of potential customers are important considerations. Finally, if a problem involves the 
choice of an appropriate selling appeal, buyers' motivations are probably be most impor- 
tant. Facts are quantitative or descriptive infonnation that can be verified. Opinions are ideas 
relating to a problem that are expressed by people involved in the solution. Motivat;ons are 
basic reasons, recognized or unrecognized, that explain action. They are extremely diffi- 
cult to discover. 

Locating the Sources of Data There are two general sources of data, secondary 
sources and primary sources. 

Secondary source information has been previously published and can be either inter- 
nal or external. Company recurds and previously prepared marketing research reports are 
typical of internal secondary source material. External secondary sources are widely avail- 
able and can be found outside the organization. Excellent bibliographies of secondary data 
sources are available, especially online. There are eight primary sources of secondary mar- 
ket information: 



PROCEDURES AND TECHNIQUES IN MARKETING RESEARCH 61 

1. Public libraries. 

2. Universities-library facilities and bureaus of business and economic research. 

3. Government agencies—especially departments of commerce, agriculture, and labor. 

4. Professional and trade associations. 

5. Commercial publishers—especially trade publications. 

6. Research and nonprofit organizations. 

7. Conferences and personal contact. 

8. Computer-provided search systems. 

There are tremendous advantages in using data from secondary sources. In the first 
place, the expense of gathering information from secondary sources is a fraction of the cost 
of collecting primary data. The time required to collect data is also less. Frequently, the 
information required to solve a management problem must be obtained quickly. Thanks to 
computer technology, it is now possible to gather, merge, and reformulate many second- 
ary sources of data. This capability has made secondary data even more attractive. 

The inherent limitations of using secondary sources data are twofold. First, the infor- 
mation is frequently dated. Second, seldom are secondary data collected for precisely the 
same reasons that the information is sought to solve the current marketing problem. In spite 
of these limitations, the advantages of secondary research are so great that it is a common 
procedure not to proceed with the collection of primary data until after a thorough search 
of secondary information source has been completed. 

Primary information is obtained directly from its source. It involves data that are 
not available in published form or in company records. It is gathered specifically to answer 
your research question. The sources of primary information, however, cannot be as eas- 
ily identified as can the sources of secondary market data. Having identified the information 
required to help management solve a problem, it is usually possible to identify the person 
or persons possessing the information desired. In some cases, the information can be obtained 
from one of several sources. In other situations, the information can be obtained only by 
contacting specific sources. For example, a manufacturer of vitamins for children discovered 
that it was necessary to obtain information from the users (children), purchasers (parents), 
sellers (for the most part, druggists), and purchase influencers (pediatricians). Similarly, 
a manufacturer of feed for dairy cattle found it desirable to seek market information from 
farmers, feed dealers, and dairy specialists. Obviously, it is expensive to collect market- 
ing information from multiple sources, and often it is ratner time-consuming. These two 
disadvantages are offset by the fact that the information so obtained is tailored to the spe- 
cific problem at hand. Ultimately, the question as to which source of market information 
to use depends on the value of the information in relationship to the time and cost required 
to gather it. 4 

Choosing the Method of Collecting Data There are various methods of collect- 
ing data, both secondary and primary. Secondary sources of information, listed earlier, can 
be gathered through a number of means. A company may establish a data-gathering/stor- 
age system as part of their computer system. Sales, expenses, inventory, returns, and cus- 
tomer complaints are then gathered automatically. Or a company can subscribe to one or 
more public research companies that gather relevant information. Finally, a company can 
obtain information on a problem-by-problem basis . 

There are three common methods used to collect primary information: observation, 
questionnaire, and self-report. Observational data collection may be the oldest method. 
Since the beginning of commerce, merchants have been watching their customers and 



62 CHAPTER 3 MARKETING RESEARCH: AN AIDTO DECISION MAKING 



Eoncustomers engage in a variety of behaviors. Examples include shopping, purchase, return, 
complaint behavior, and so forth. A local fast food manager might simply observe the expres- 
sion on customers' faces as they eat anew sandwich. More formal observation techniques 
are also employed. Video cameras or audio systems can be targeted at customers. Researchers 
can also be hired to do license plate surveys in parking lots or simply record observations 
in a prescribed manner. There are even observational techniques that are quite intrusive. 
For instance, in the case of apantry (cabinet) audit, the researcher comes to the consumer's 
home and actually takes an inventory of products found. Ethnography requires that the 
researcher practically move in with the consumer and observe various relevant behaviors. 
This technique is illustrated in the Newsline box that follows. 



NEWSLINE: WHERE'S THE BEEF? 

A woman in suburban Baltimore is shopping for her family's meals 
for the week. She cruises past the poultry section, stopping only 
momentarily to drop a couple of packages of boneless chicken breasts 
into her cart. Then, the dreaded sea of red looms before her. Tenta- 
tively, she picks up a package of beef. "This cut looks good, not too 
fatty," she says, juggling her two-year-old on her hip. "But 1 don't 
know what it is. I don't know how to cook it," she confesses, and 
trades it for a small package of sirloin and her regular order of 
ground beef. 

Scenes like these are replayed daily in supermarkets across the 
country. But this time, it's being captured on videotape by New York 
City-based PortICo Research, part of a recent ethnographic study of 
beef consumers for the National Cattleman's Beef Association (NCBA) 
and major grocery retailers. And due in part to the trepidation of this 
one mother in Baltimore, many grocers' meat cases are now being 
rearranged to display beef by cooking method, rather than by cuts of 
meat. Simple, three-step cooking instructions will soon be printed on 
the packages 

Ethnographic research, which combines intense observation with 
customer interviews, shows companies how people live with 
products-how they purchase and use them in their everyday lives. 
Knowing what consumers do with beef is vital to the NCBA. The study 
cost the NCBA approximately $60,000 (studies might range from 
$5,000 to $800,000). PortiCo videotaped consumer's purchasing 
behavior as well as their preparation habits at home. The researchers 
interviewed them each step of the way what they thought about beef, 
why they did (or didn't) select particular cuts, and how they prepared 
the family meal. The retailers couldn't believe how little consumers 
knew about something that seemed as familiar to them as sliced 
bread or soft drinks. 

Sources: Kendra Parker, "How Do You Like Your Beef?" American Demograph- 
ics, January 2000, pp. 35-38; Jennifer Lach, "Meet You in Aisle Three," Ameri- 
can Demograpnics, April 1999, pp. 41-42. 



The observation technique can pro Vide important research insights, especially if con- 
sistent patterns are noted. This method is relatively inexpensive and can be implemented 



PROCEDURES ANDTECHNIQUES IN MARKETING RESEARCH 63 

and completed quickly. Unfortunately, interpreting an observation is still very subjective 
and mistakes arc made. 

Gathering information through a questionnaire format reflects the most popular research 
technique. There are two interrelated issues: the design of the questionnaire and the admin- 
istration of the questionnaire. 

There are several rules of thumb that should be followed when designing a ques- 
tionnaire. For example, a good questionnaire should be like a well-written story: it should 
be logical, relevant, easy to follow, and interesting to the reader/respondent. There are also 
a host of techniques and related guidelines. For example, Figure 3.4 illustrates the forms 
questions can take. A yes/no question is considered a closed-ended dichotomous question; 
i.e., respondenl must check one of two possible answers. Questions 4 and 5 are two types 
of scaled questions . Questions 6-8 are open-ended, in that respondent can provide any answer 
desired. Closed-ended questions are best used when the researcher desires a particular set 
of answers or feels the respondent is unlikely to come up with an original answer. Open- 
ended questions allow the respondent to come up with personal answers. Of course, there 
is a risk that the respondent will have no answer. 

Other considerations are whether to place the easier questions at the beginning of the 
questionnaire, group similar questions, or place demographic questions at the end of the 
questionnaire. Again, the goal is to enaole the respondent to answer the questionnaire eas- 
ily and accuratejy. 

The design of a questionnaire is a function of how the questionnaire is administered, 
and vice versa. Four techniques for administering a questionnaire are currently used: mail, 
telephone, personal interview, and online. In the mail technique, the questionnaire is dis- 
tributed and returned through the mail. A typical packet might contain a cover letter explain- 
ing the purpose of the research, a copy of the questionnaire, a stamped self-addressed return 
envelope, and an incentive for compliance (cash, merchandise, contribution to charity, or 
copy of report). Mail questionnaires allow the researcher to ask a large number of ques- 
tions over a broad range of topics. They also allow the respondent to answer the question- 
naire at their leisure. Finally, the standardized format does not allow for subjective bias. 
Unfortunately, these advantages can become limitations. The longer the questionnaire, the 
less likely the individual will respond, in fact, a response rate of 10-20% is common with- 
out an incentive. Control is lost through the mail process. Did the targeted person answer 
the questionnaire? Did the respondent understand the questions? Did she/he complete the 
questionnaire? Was the questionnaire returned on time? The loss of control also means that 
the interviewer cannot probe further into an interesting or controversial answer. 

A more convenient and faster way of gathenng marketing information is to conduct 
a telephone survey. Names and related telephone numbers can be obtained directly from a 
telephone directory or from an internally or externally generated database. Telephone sur- 
veys are limited in several important ways, such as the difficulty of reaching the correct 
respondent, the problem of completing the interview if the respondent decides to hang up, 
and the inability to eliminate the bias introduced by not interviewing those without phones 
or individuals With unlisted numbers. Also, 10- 15 questions are likely to be the maximum 
number to be asked. Therefore, only a limited number of topics can be addressed. In spite 
of these limitations, the telephone survey method has grown in popularity. The costs are 
relatively low, research companies can provide well-trained and technically supported inter- 
viewers, and the technique works if the research questions are limited and require a quick 
answer. Still, it would be better if they didn't call while you were eating dinner. 

Although often very costly and time-consuming, personal interviews may constitute 
the best way of collecting survey information. Once compliance is gained, the well-trained 
interviewer can make sure the right person is answering, ask as many questions as necessary, 



64 CHAPTER 3 MARKETING RESEARCH: AN AID TO DECISION MAKING 



A. DIRECT QUESTIONS/CLOSED-ENDED 



1. HAVE YOU PURCHASED A NEW AUTOMOBILE SINCE JANUARY 1 OF THIS 
YEAR: 

DYES D NO 

2. IF YOU HAVE PURCHASED A NEW AUTOMOBILE, WHAT MAKE AND 
MODEL DID YOU BUY? 

MAKE: MODEL: 

3. IF YOU HAVE NOT PURCHASED A CAR SINCE JANUARY 1, DO YOU NOW 
PLAN TO BUY A NEW AUTOMOBILE BEFORE DECEMBER 3 1 OF THIS 
YEAR? 

DYES DNO D NOT DECIDED 

4. IF YOU HAVE NOT DECIDED WHETHER OR NOT YOU WILL BUY A NEW 
AUTOMOBILE, DO YOU NOW THINK THAT IT IS 

_ EXTREMELY LIKELY 

_QUITE LIKELY 

UNLIKELY 

.EXTREMELY UNLIKELY 

THAT YOU WILL BUY A NEW AUTOMOBILE BETWEEN NOW AND 
DECEMBER 31 ? 

5. I TEND TO RELY HEAVILY ON THE REPUTATION OF A CAR BRAND 

DISAGREE AGREE 

2 3 4 5 

B . DEPTH QUESTIONS/OPEN-ENDED 

6. IF YOU HAVE NOT PURCHASED A NEW AUTOMOBILE, WHAT IS THE MOST 
IMPORTANT REASON FOR YOUR DECISION NOT TO BUY A NEW CAR? 



7. THAT IS VERY INTERESTING. TELL ME MORE ABOUT THAT. 



8. ANY OTHER REASONS? 



FIGURE 3.4 Examples of questions used in marketing research 



make sure questions are understood, probe in order to address new issues, and encourage 
the respondent to complete the questionnaire. With freeaom comes bias. It is sometimes 
difficult for an interviewer to maintain objectivity. Asking questions with a certain intona- 
tion, changing the wording, or changing the ordering of questions can all modify responses. 



PROCEDURES ANDTECHNIQUES IN MARKETING RESEARCH 65 

There are several online information-gathering techniques that allow the respondent 
more freedom in providing answers. As one would expect, there has been a recent rapid 
technological evolution in this area. Online questionnaires can help web site sponsors to 
gauge customer satisfaction, profile visitors, and provide a way to measure traffic for adver- 
tisers beyond banner click-throughs. By using research tools such as exit surveys, e-tailers 
can find out why people are leaving their sites-and why they might not come back. 

There are four popular types of online research. Pop-up surveys occur when visitors 
are intercepted when they leave certain pages of the web site. A questionnaire then appears 
in a box on top of their main browser screens asking for responses. With e-maiUweb sur- 
veys, a company sends an e-mail message asking the recipient to complete a survey. Some- 
times the survey is embedded in the e-mail itself. Other times the e-mail lists either a 
passworded location to visit or a unique location that only the addressee can access to fill 
out the survey. Online groups are much like traditional focus groups , but are conducted in 
a web-based chat room where select individuals are invited by the company or its research 
firm. Finally, in the case of moderated e-mail groups, discussions take place over a period 
of time with a group communicating bye-mail. A moderator compiles the answers and sends 
the summary back to the group for comments and follow-up. 

The third technique used to gather research information is self-reporting. This tech- 
nique allows the respondent to deliver the information in a somewhat unstructured format. 
One very popular version of this technique is thefocus group. A focus group takes place 
in a room where approximately 8-10 individuals and a trained mocerator gather to discuss 
a particular business problem or set of problems. Often, the room contains a two-way mir- 
ror, which the sponsors of the research sit behind in order to observe the process. The pro- 
ceedings are audiotaped and/or videotaped. Focus groups have been an extremely popular 
type of data collecting for a long time. A great deal of diverse information can be gathered 
quickly (assuming there is a well-trained moderator). However, there are serious limitations. 
It's still a subjective process and interpretation is necessary. It is also expensive; often sev- 
eral thousand dollars per focus group. Finally, it is difficult to control the behavior of 
the participants. Some dominate and some say nothing. And some become the equivalent 
of professional focus group me;ubers and no longer are able to provide the hoped-for 
spontaneity. 

According to a psychologically proven premise, it is possible by impersonalizing ques- 
tions to obtain information from a respondent that he would not, or could not, otherwise 
provide. This method involves the use of the projective technique, and represents a second 
type of self-report technique. The intent of the projective technique is to give respondents 
an opportunity to answer questions without the embarrassment or confusion created by direct 
involvement. Several projective techniques are employed: 

1. Word association tests. In the word association test, the respondent is asked to 
say the first word that comes into his mind upon the presentation of another word 
stimulus. The most obvious applications of this test are in research on brand recog- 
nition, company image, and advertising appeals. 

2. Sentence completion tests. In a sentence completion test, the respondent is asked 
to complete a number of sentences with the first words that come to mind. A series 
of sentence completion questions used by a supermarket chain were: (a) I like to 
shop in an AG supermarket because . . .; Cb) I think that food prices are . 

(c) The thing that bothers me most about food shopping in an AG store is .. . . 

The sentence completion test is relatively simple to administer and easy to 
interpret. It is usually difficult, however, to reduce the finding from a sentence 
completion test to statistical form. 



66 CHAPTER 3 MARKETING RESEARCH: AN AIDTO DECISION MAKING 



3. Fsychodrama. In the psychodramatic type of question, the respondent is asked to 
project himself into an artificial marketing situation. The obvious artificiality of 
the situation makes the psychodrama a "role-playing" experiment in which the 
respondent provides information based on his personal attitudes through his expla- 
nation of the artificial situation. 

Perhaps the greatest deficiency of projective techniques is the difficulty of present- 
ing the findings. The identification of attitudes, motives, opinions, and -o forth is not dif- 
ficult; however, it is extremely hard to measure the importance of these factors. 

Selecting the Sample In most marketing research, it is seldom necessary to con- 
duct a complete census; i.e. , to talk to 100% of the target segment. To do so in time-con- 
smning and expensive. For this reason most marketing strveys make use of smaples. A sample 
is a group of elements (persons, stores, financial reports) chosen from among a "total pop- 
ulation" or "universe." The value of a research project is directly affected by how well the 
sample has been conceived and constructed. 8 

The selection of the sample to be investigated requires a master list, or a framework, 
from which they may be selected. The sampling frame is the "population" or statistical "uni- 
verse" from which the sample units will be selected. The frame for a survey of attitudes of 
credit customers of a department store would be the company's list of customers using charge 
accounts. 

Although there are many kinds of sample designs, all of them can be classified as 
either probability samples ox nonp rob ability samples. In a probability sample, each unit has 
a known chance of being selected for inclusion in the sample. Its simplest version is the 
simple random sample, in which each unit in the sample frame has exactly 'he same chance 
of selection. Examples of this iilclude flipping a fair coin, whose sides have a 50% chance 
of turning up and throwing an unloaded die, whose sides have a 162/3% chance of turn- 
ing up. This same plinciple can be applied to the previous depanment store example. A 
sample of names could be selected from the company's list of charge customers according 
to a random process, such as that of using a table of random digits. 

While in a probability sample the sampling units have a known chance of being selected, 
in &nonp rob ability sampie the sampling units are selected arbitrarily. To return to our depart- 
ment store example, instead of using a table of random numbers to select a sample of charge 
customers, an arbitrary and more convenient method would be to take the first fifty or sixty 
names on the list. 

Anticipating the ResultslMaking the Report The research plan should provide 
for: (1) procedures for processing the data; (2) procedures for interpretation and analysis 
of the findings; and (3) an outline of the final report. In reaching these decisions, it is usu- 
ally helpfu; to work from the form and content of the final report. The report should pres- 
ent a summary of findings and recommendations for management action drawn up in the 
light of the reasons for the research. The kindr. of facts to be presented and the manner of 
their presentation dictates the type of analysis to be undertaken. The kinds of analysis will, 
in turn, often suggest the method of data processing. Data processing in general refers to 
the procedures for sorting, assembling, and reporting data. It can be done manually by the 
use of work sheets or by computer programming. The method of data processing has impor- 
tant bearing upon the manner in which the data are collected and reported. Thus, the design 
of the project is often expedited by a thorough consideration of the kinds of results that are 
expected and how they will be handled in the final report. 

Anticipating the results of the project and preparing a "dummy" final report has another 
advantage. It is often helpful to use the results of this step in the research design to demon- 



THE VALUE OF MARKETING RESEARCH 67 

strate to management the kind of project that is going to be undertaken. Agreement by the 
management group that the kinds of information anticipated will assist in the solving of a 
marketing problem is helpful in obtaining approval for the project and in restraining man- 
agement expectations as to the scope and purpose of the project. 



CONDUCTING THE RESEARCH 



The attention devoted in the previous paragraphs to the design of the research plan might 
leave the impression that once a marketing research project has been carefully designed, 
the job is almost done . Clearly, this is not the case. The implementation of a research plan 
is seldom an easy task. Often a research program requires extra effort from already-busy 
personnel in the company. In oiher cases, outsiders must be recruited, hired, and trained. 
In either situation, carrying out a marketing researcn plan is difficult and requires very close 
supervision and control. To the extent that the plan has been well conceived, supervision 
and control are restricted to making sure that the research activities called for in the plan 
are carried out according to schedule and in the manner prescribed. 



PROCESSING THE DATA 



Processing the data obtained in a market survey involves transforming the information 
obtained into a report to be used by management. Four steps are involved: (1 ) editing the 
data; (2) tabulating the data; (3) interpreting tile data; and (4) presenting the report. If, in 
the anticipation of the results of the survey, the procedures for handling the data have been 
sent forth and the form of the final report conceived, these final four steps in the research 
procedure may be quite mechanical. A good plan for the analysis and interpretation of the 
data is of immense assistance in bringing a project to a successful conclusion, but it should 
never limit the kinds of interpretations that eventually are made or restrict the content of 
the final report. 

The final report of a marketing research stUdy should ordinarily be written. Since vast 
amounts of data often are involved, the written report is the only appropriate method of 
presenting these findings. The written report also has the advantage of being permanent, 
thus permitting management to study the findings carefully and to refer to them in the future. 
Unfortunately, many marketing research projects are never translated into management 
action-sometimes because the research conclusions do not directly contribute to the solu- 
tion of the problem, sometimes because the report is too technical and difficult to under- 
stand, and sometimes because the report writer has not offered specific suggestions as to 
how the report should be translated into management strategy. 



THE VALUE OF MARKETING RESEARCH 



It is important to point out that it is not always necessary to conduct research before attempt- 
ing to solve a problem in marketing management. The manager may feel that he already 
knows enough to make a good decision. In a few instances, there may be no choice among 
alternatives and hence no decision to make. It is rather pointless to study a problem if there 
is only one possible solutions. But in most business situations, the manager must make a 
choice among two or more courses of action. This is where fact-finding enters in to help 
make the choice. 



68 



CHAPTER 3 MARKETING RESEARCH: AN AID TO DECISION MAKING 



But even if a manager would like more information in order to make a decision, it is 
not always wise for her to conduct the research that would be required. One reason is that 
the time involved may be too great. Another more compelling reason is that the cost of the 
research may exceed its contribution. In principle, it is easy to understand how such a cost 
test might be applied . I f the cost of conducting the research is less than its contribution to 
the improvement of the decision, the research should be carried out. I f its cost is greater, 
it should not be conducted. The application of this ptinciple in actual practice is somewhat 
more complex. Finally, good research should help integrale marketing with the other areas 
of the business. 



RESEARCH BRINGS IT TOGETHER 



It's the bane of modern business: too many data, not enough 
information. Computers are everywhere, accumulating giga- 
bytes galore. Yet it only seems to get harder to find the for- 
est for the trees-to extract significance from the blizzard of 
numbers, facts, and stats. But help is on the way, in the form 
of a new class of software technology known broadly as data- 
mining. First developed to help scientists make sense of exper- 
imental data, this software has enough smarts to "see" 
meaningful patterns and relationships-to see patterns that 
might otherwise take tens of man-years to find. That's a huge 
leap beyond conventional computer databases, which are pow- 
erful but unimaginative . They must be told precisely what to 
look for. Data-mining tools can sift through immense col- 
lections of customer, marketing, production, and financial data, 
and, using statistical and artificial intelligence techniques, iden- 
tify what's worth noting and what's not. 

The payoffs can be huge, as MCI Communications is learn- 
ing. Like other phone companies, MCI wants to keep its best 
customers. One way is to identify early those who might be 
considering jumping to a rival. If it can do that, the Carrier 
can try to keep the customer with offers of special rates and 
services, for example. 

How to find the customers you want to keep from among 
the millions? MCl's answer has been to comb marketing data 
on 140 million households, each evaluated on as many as 
10,000 attributes-characteristics such as income, lifestyle, 
and details about past calling habits. But which set of those 
attributes is the most important to monitor, and within what 
range of values? A rapidly declining monthly bill may seem 
like a dead give-away, but is there a subtler pattern in inter- 



national calling to be looking for, too? Or in the number of 
calls made to MCl's customer-service lines? 

To find out, MCI regularly fires up its IBM SPI2 super- 
computer-its "data warehouse"-which identifies the most 
telling variables to keep an eye on. So far, the SPI2 has com- 
piled a set of 22 detailed-and highly secret-statistical pro- 
files based on repeated crunching of historical facts. None of 
them could have been developed without data-mining pro- 
grams, says Lance Boxer, MCT's Chief Information Officer. 

Data-mining in itself is a relatively tiny market: sales of 
such programs will grow to maybe $750 million by 2001. But 
the technology is crucial in getting a big payoff from what 
information technology executives think will be an immensely 
important growth area in coming years: data warehousing. 
There are the enormous collections of data-sometimes tril- 
lions of bytes-compiled by mass marketers, retailers, or serv- 
ice companies as they monitor transactions from millions of 
customers. Data warehouses, running on ultrafast computers 
with specialized software, are the basis on which companies 
hope to operate in real time-instantly adjusting product mix, 
inventory levels, cash reserves, marketing programs, or other 
factors to changing business conditions. 

Source: John W. Verity, "Coaxing Meaning out of Raw Data," 
Business Week, February 3, 1997, pp. 134-138; "Researchers Inte- 
grate Internet Tools in Their Work," R&D Magazine, June 2000, 
vol. 24, No. 6, p. E13; "Smarter Kids. Com Chooses Quadstons- 
The Smartest Customer Data Mining Solution," Business Week, 
July 31, 2000. 




THE WALL STREET JOURNAL. 



IN PRACTICE 

Marketing research is a scientific 
and controlled process, but ulti- 
mately, decisions are based on a 
blend of facts and intuition. Under- 
standing marketing research allows 
managers to intelligently evaluate 
findings and recommendations. 

Determining the purpose and 
scope of the research is the first 
critical activity in any marketing 
research project. All subsequent 
decisions are results of this process. 
Creating the research design, con- 
ducting the investigation, and pro- 
cessing the data are the remaining 
critical activities. Both primary and 
secondary data are accumulated 
when conduction research. Using 
this information to produce good 
research allows managers to inte- 
grate marketing with other areas of 
the business. 

Secondary sources of data 
online include associations and 
business information sites. Check 
out the American Marketing Asso- 
ciation's website at 
www.ama.org/resource for a list of 
resources and guides. For links to 
business directories, media sites, 
and marketing-related resource?., 
check out A Business Researchers 
Interests at www.brint.com. 

Your subscription to the Inter- 
active Journal allows you to access 
articles in various Dow Jones publi- 
cations. Under More Dow Jones 
Sites in the left menu, click on Dow 
Jones & Co. From here you will be 
able to access Dow Jones Web Links 
which offers you links to dozens of 
business and news websites. Click on 
several of these links now. 

Return to the Interactive Jour- 
nal's Front Section. Under Tools in 
the left menu , select WSJ Yogi. The 



WSJ Yogi is a free software applica- 
tion that works like a personal 
assistant, automatically suggesting 
relevant content to you as you 
browse the web. The WSJ Yogi will 
gather links to related stories as you 
read. Download the WSJ Yogi now. 
Return again to the Interactive 
Journal's Front Section. Under 
Resources in the left menu, select 
Special Reports. This section offers 
links to special reports that have 
appeared as supplements to The 
Wall Street Journal print edition. 
These reports provide a thorough 
analysis and review of various top- 
ics such as e-commerce, Small Busi- 
ness, and World Business. Rev;ew 
recent Special Reports now. 

DELIVERABLE 

With the information provided in 
this section about web resources, 
use the Interactive journal and rel- 
evant web links to conduct market 
research on recent trends in 
e-commerce. Find at least five 
sources of secondary data online 
that will help you identify relevant 
trends in e-commerce advertising, 
marketing, and business strategies. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 

1. How can marketing research 
help managers create successful 
product lines and customer rela- 
tionships? 

2. Most people conduct research 
when buying certain "big ticket" 
items like cars or computers. How 
do you conduct marketing 
research for these types of items? 

3. How has the Internet impacted 
consumers and their purchase 
decisionr.? What about tne impact 
on companies? 



69 



70 CHAPTER 3 MARKETING RESEARCH: AN AID TO DECISION MAKING 



1. The following steps are involved in conducting marketing c. Conducting the investigation 

research: d. Processing the data/deliver the results 

a. Making a preliminary investigation 

b. Creating the research design 



SUMMARY 



Four major elements are involved in undertaking marketing research. The first element is a prelimi- 
nary investigation. This initial study permits the researcher to determine the purpose and scope of his 
research as well as to identify tentative questions. 

Creating a research design to test the questions is the most important and most complicated 
aspect of marketing research. It commences with the selection of the approach to be taken. The three 
most commonly used are the experimental, the observational, and the survey approaches. Any given 
project may use one or more of the three. 

It is also necessary to determine the types of data that will be needed to solve the marketing 
problem and to locate sources where this information can be obtained. Data sources are generally 
classified as either primary or secondary. Secondary data are made up of previously collected infor- 
mation and are obtained from historical records, publications, government documents, and the like. 
Primary data are gathered for the first time. The survey method is probably the most frequently used 
method for collecting primary data. Data are by gathered by mail, by telephone, by personal inter- 
viewing, and online. 

Another critical aspect of most marketing research projects is the selection of the sample. A 
probability sample involves the selection of respondents in such a way that every unit in the pool has 
the same chance of being selected. One method of drawing a probability sample is by the use of a 
table of random digits. A nonprobability sample is drawn on ajudgmental basis; ihe respondents are 
selected because they are considered to be representative of the group from which they are drawn. 

The final aspect of the research design is the anticipation of the results and the decision as to 
how the data will be summarized and reported. It is becoming more and more common in large mar- 
keting research projects to make use of a computer for the processing and tabulation of the research 
results. Some problems usually arise, however, and careful supervision and control of the data-col- 
lection activities are important. It is particularly critical to gv'ivci against various kinds of survey bias 
that can creep into a project. 



MARKETER'S VOCABULARY 



Marketing research The scientific and controlled gatheli ng of nonroutine marketing information 
undertaken to help management solve marketing problems. 

Informal assessment An unstructured search of the marketing environinenL 

Research design Plan proposed for testing the research questions as well as collecting and pro- 
cessing information. 

Experimental approach Variable interest must be manipulated and ev(;ryone participating in the 
experiment must have a known and equal chance of being selected. 



PROJECT 71 

Historical/case method Reliance is placed on past experiences in seeking solutions to current 
marketing problems. 

Survey approach Marketing infonnation is collected either from observation or by questionnaire 
or interview. 

Secondary source data Information that has been previously published and can come from 
within or outside the business. 

Primary information Information gathered to address a particular problem. 

Data processing Procedures for sorting, assembling, and reporting data. 



DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 



1. Marketing research is sometimes referred to as a "problem-solving tool." Explain what is meant 
by this statement. 

2. It is often argued that only such fields as physics, chemistry, and mathematics are really "scien- 
tific" and that marketing research, as common with all behavioral research, cannot be scientific. 
How would you respond to someone who stated this opinion? 

3. Do you think that a distinction can be made between "pure" and "applied" research in marketing? 

4. Select a local or campus enterprise with which you are familiar. Identify a marketing problem 
that it faces. (You may need to interview the manager of the establishment.) Translate this mar- 
keting problem into its informational elements. Conduct a small-scale informal investigation: 

(a) What tentative hypotheses can you develop? 

(b) What types of research design do you believe would be necessary to test these hypotheses? 

5. A small manufacturer of highly specialized medical laboratory equipment and a manufacturer 
of a proprietary (nonprescription) cold remedy need information to assist in planning new prod- 
uct introductions. What would be the advantages and drawbacks of using primary versus sec- 
ondary marketing information for each firm? 

6. You are the advertising manager of a company that manufactures professional baseball equip- 
ment. Your firm employs fifty field salespeople who make periodic calls on sporting goods deal- 
ers, large schools and colleges, and professional athletic organizations. You also place full-page 
advertisements in a trade publication for the sporting goods industry, Scholastic Coach. The pres- 
ident of your company has questioned the use of this publication and has asked you to find out 
how effective it is in increasing awareness about your products and in stimulating sales. How 
would you go about this task? 

7. In 1970, Ford Motor Co. introduced its subcompact automobile, the Pinto. Suppose you had been 
a marketing research analyst working for another car manufacturer. What kinds of primary and 
secondary marketing research would you have conducted to evaluate the success of this new prod- 
uct introduction? 



PROJECT 



Design a short questionnaire (no more than 10 questions) intended to reveal whether or not another 
otudent is a good prospect for a new laptop computer. Assume the purpose of this questionnaire is to 



72 CHAPTER 3 MARKETING RESEARCH: AN AIDTO DECISION MAKING 



obtain information that could be used to help increase sales of laptops to college students. Would you 
use the same questions on a mail questionnaire as in a personal interview? ff not, what questions would 
you use if you were going to mail the questionnaires? 



CASE APPLICATION 



RESEARCH SAVESTHE DAY AT CASE 

In today's combative marketplace, making any significant progress against skillful and large rivals is 
nothing short of a colossal achievement. Case Corporation, a manufacturer of construction and farm 
equipment, can make such a claim, but only after spending two years digging itself out of decline- 
operating losses for 1991 and 1992 reached $900,000-and finally showing growth. Case's net income 
increased more than 300% in 1994 to $165 million WiUl a 14% sales increase, and 1995 revenues 
reached $4.2 billion. 

Significant headway toward recovery began in 1994 when new CEO Jean-Pierre Rosso launched 
a new era at Case. His matter-of-fact pronouncement, "We need to be asking what the farmer and 
contractor need," triggered the company's turnaround and kindled a new respect from its customers. 

Basic as it may seem, for most of the 1980s, 'asking" was not a part of Case's product-driven 
orientation. Result: Underperforming products such a?, low-horsepower tractors entered the market- 
place, fueled by low prices and sales incentives. 

Worse yet, when market demand eventually plumrncled, dealers found themselves stuck with 
a glut of unsold Case equipment. To further aggravate the situation, relationships with dealers were 
increasingly greeted with suspicion. 

In the face of those dire conditions, Rosso issued his market-driven directive that pressed Case 
managers to determine the wants and needs of its customers. One incident showcases the process they 
used to obtain reliable customer feedback: A contractor was flown in to Case's Burlington, Iowa test 
site and put to work for three days testing a piece of Case equipment and comparing its performance 
with that of comparable Caterpillar and Deere machines. Each day managers grilled the customer 
about features, benefits, and problems. 

In another approach, Case sent teams of engineers and marketing personnel to talk to key cus- 
tomers and users of competitors' equipment. Applying what they learned from the feedback, engi- 
neers developed prototype machines and shipped them to hundreds of participating users for evaluation. 
The engineers then incorporated actual field data into final prototypes. 

The bottom line: All this market-driven "asking' is a far cry from the Case's reputation dur- 
ing the 1980s of being one of the most mismanaged companies in the field. 

Questions 

1. Although things seem to be going well for Case, can you identify any potential mistakes they made 
in doing their research? 

2. How could they gather secondary data on this product category? 



REFERENCES 



1. Ralph H. Sprague, Jr. and Hugh J. Watson, Decision Support Systems: 3. Ian P. Murphy, "Research with Bottom Line in Mind Only," Market- 
PUlling Theory Into Practice, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, ing News, March 3, 1997, p. 10. 

1986, p. 1, 4. Pamela L. Alreck and Robert Li. Settle, The Survey Research Hand- 

2. Claire Selitz, Lawrence S. Wrightsman, and Stuart W. Cook, book, Richard D. Irwin, Inc., 1995. 

Research Methods in Social Relations, New York: Holt, Reinhart and 5. Seymour Sudman, Applied Sampling, New York: Academic Press, 
Winston, J976, pp. 114-115. 1976 



CHAPTER4 



UNDERSTANDING BUYER BEHAVIOR 



LEARNING OBJECTIVES 



Having read this chapter, you should be able to: 

Understand the behavior of the individual consumers in the 

marketplace. 

Examine the many factors that influence consumer behavior. 
Recognize the various principles of psychology, sociology, and 
social psychology that are (If value in explaining consumer 
behavior. 

Examine the relationship of consumer behavior to marketing 
management, decisions-particularly, target market selection and 
the design of the marketing mix. 

Understand how organizational market behavior differs from con- 
sumer market behavior. 

Examine how organizations make purchase decisions. 



TILL DEATH DO US PART 



At 



1 :58 P.M. on Wednesday, May 5, in Houston's St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital, a 
consumer was born. Her name was Alyssa 1. Nedell, and by the time she went home 
three days later, some of America's biggest marketers were pursuing her with samples, 
coupons, and assorted freebies. Proctor & Gamble hoped its Pampers brand would win 
the battle for Alyssa's bottom. Johnson & Johnson offered a tiny sample of its baby soap. 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. sent along some of its Enfamil baby formula. 

Like no generation before, Alyssa enters a consumer culture surrounded by logos, 
labels, and acts almost from the moment of birth. As an infant. Alyssa may wear Sesame 
Street diapers and miniature pro-basketball jerseys. By the time she's 20 months old, she 
will start to recognize some of the thousands of brands flashed in front of her each day. 
At age 7, if she's anything like the typical kid, she will see some 20,000 TV commer- 
cials a year. By the time she's 12, she will have her own entry in the massive data banks 
of marketers. Multiply / lyssa by 30 million-tre number of babies born in this country 
since 1990- and you have the largest generation to flood the market since the baby 
boom. More impressive than their number;, though, is their wealth. The increase in sin- 
gle-parent and dual-earner households ipeans that kids are making shopping decisions 
once left to Mom. Combining allowance, earnings, and gifts, kids aged 14 and under will 
directly spend an estimated $20 billion this year, and will influence another $200 billion. 



73 



74 CHAPTER 4 UNDERSTANDING BUYER BEHAVIOR 



No wonder they have become the target of marketing campaigns so sophisticated as to 
make the kid-aimed pitches of yore look like, well, Mickey Mouse. 

Marketers who had long ignored children now systematically pursue them-even 
when the tykes are years away from being able to buy their products. "Ten years ago it 
was cereal, candy, and toys. Today it's also computers and airlines and hotels and 
banks," says Julie Halpin, general manager of Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising's Kid Con- 
nection Division. "A lot of people are turning to a whole segment of the population they 
haven't been talking to before." 

Those businesses that have always targeted kids, such as fast-food restaurants and 
toymakers, have stepped up their pitches, hoping to reach kids earlier and bind them 
more tightly. Movies, T-shirts, hamburger wrappers, and dolls are all part of the cross- 
promotional blitz aimed at convincing kids to spend. The cumulative effect of initiating 
children into a consumerist ethos at an early age may be profound. As kids take in the 
world around them, many of their cultural encounters -from books to movies to TV- 
have become little more than sales pitches. Even their classrooms are filled with corpo- 
rate logos. To quote clinical psychologist Mary Pipher, "Instead of transmitting a sense 
of who we are and what we hold important, today's marketing-driven culture is instilling 
in them the sense that little exists without a sales pitch attached and that self-worth is 
something you buy at a shopping mall." 

Some wonder if marketers are creating a relationship with consumers too soo;, and 
for all the wrong reasons. 

Sources: David Leonhardt. "Hey Kid, Buy This. Business Week. June 30. 1997. p. 65-67; Larry Armstrong. "Pssst! Come Inlo 
My Web." Business Week. June 30,1 997. p. 67; Tom McGee, "Gening Inside Kids Heads," American Demographics, January 
1997, pp. 53- 59: "Kids These Days," American Demographics, April 2000, pp. 9- 10; Joan Raymond, "Kids Just Wanna Have 
Fun," American Demographics, February 2000, pp. 57-61. 



INTRODUCTION 



As noted, many of the parents of today's kids are the baby boomers marketers have been 
tracking for over forty years. Primarily, their importance is based on their group's enor- 
mous size. Just as important, however, is that they have a great deal in common; some demo- 
graphics, such as age, income, and health; some shared concerns such as college for their 
children, retirement, and diminishing health; and some behaviors such as voting Republi- 
can, eating out, and buying expensive walking shoes. Nevertheless, they still remain indi- 
viduals who were brought up in a unique family and retain a personal way of thinking and 
behaving. The ultimate challenge facing marketers is to understand the buyer both as an 
individual and as a member of society so that the buyer's needs are met by the product offered 
by the marketer. The purpose of this chapter is to present a discussion of several of the key 
buyer behaviors considered important to marketers. 



BUYER BEHAVIOR AND EXCHANGE 



As noted in an earlier chapter, the relationship between the buyer and the seller exists through 
a phenomenon called a market exchange. The exchange process allows the parties to assess 
the relative trade-offs they must make to satisfy their respective needs and wants. For the 



BUYER BEHAVIOR AS PROBLEM SOLVING 75 

marketer, analysis of these trade-offs is guided by company polices and objectives. For exam- 
ple, a company may engage in exchanges only when the profit margin is 10% or greater. 
The buyer, the other member in the exchange, also has personal policies and objectives that 
guide their responses in an exchange. Unfortunately, buyers seldom write down their per- 
sonal policies and objectives. Even more likely, they often don't understand what prompts 
them to behave in a particular manner. This is the mystery or the "black box" of buyer behav- 
ior that makes the exchange process so unpredictable and difficult for marketers to understand. 

Buyers are essential partners in the exchange process. Without them, exchanges would 
stop. They are the focus of successful marketing ; their needs and wants are the reason for 
marketing. Without an understanding of buyer behavior, the market offering cannot possi- 
bly be tailored to the demands of potential buyers. When potential buyers are not satisfied, 
exchange falters and the goals of the marketer cannot be met. As long as buyers have free 
choice and competitive offerings from which to choose, they are ultimately in control of 
the marketplace. 

A market can be defined as a group of potential buyers with needs and wants and the 
purchasing power to satisfy them. The potential buyers, in commercial situations, "vote" 
(with their dollars) for the market offering that they feel best meets their needs. An under- 
standing of how they arrive at a decision allows the marketer to build an offering that will 
attract buyers . Two of the key questions that a marketer needs to answer relative to buyer 
behavior are: 

1. How do potential buyers go about making purchase decisions? 

2. What factors influence their decision process and in what way? 

The answers to these two questions form the basis for target market selection, and, ulti- 
mately, the design of a market offering. 

When we use the term "buyer, - ' we are referring to an individual, group, or organi- 
zation that engages in market exchange. In fact, there are differences in the characteristics 
of these three entities and how they behave in an exchange. Therefore, individuals and groups 
are traditionally placed in the consumer category, while organization is the second cate- 
gory. Let us now turn to consumer decision making. 



BUYER BEHAVIOR AS PROBLEM SOLVING 



Consumer behavior refers to buyers who are purchasing for personal, family, or group use. 
Consumer behavior can be thought of as the combination of efforts and results related to 
the consumer's need to solve problems. Consumer problem solving is triggered by the iden- 
tification of some unmet need . A family consumes all of the milk in the house or the tires 
on the family care wear out or the bowling team is planning an end-of-the-season picnic . 
This presents the person with a problem which must be solved. Problems can be viewed 
in terms of two types of needs: physical (such as a need for food) or psychological (for 
example, the need to be accepted by others). 

Although the difference is a subtle one, there is some benefit in distinguishing between 
needs and wants. A need is a basic deficiency given a particular essential item. You need 
food, water, air, security, and so forth. A want is placing certain personal criteria as to how 
that need must be fulfilled. Therefore, when we are hungry, we often have a specific food 
item in mind. Consequently, a teenager will lament to a frustrated parent that there is noth- 
ing to eat, standing in front of a full refrigerator. Most of marketing is in the want-fulfilling 
business, not the need-fulfilling business. Timex doesn't want you to buy just any watch, 
they want you to want a Timex brand watch. Likewise, Ralph Lauren wants you to want 



76 



CHAPTER 4 UNDERSTANDING BUYER BEHAVIOR 



Polo when you shop for clothes. On the other hand, the American Cancer Association would 
like you to feel a need for a check-up and doesn't care which doctor you go to.:n the end, 
however, marketing is mostly interested in creating and satisfying wants. 

The Decision Process 

Figure 4.1 outlines the process a consumer goes through in making a purchase decision. 
Each step is illustrated in the following sections of your text. Once the process is started, 
a potential buyer can withdraw at any stage of making the actual purchase. The tendency 
for a person to go through all six stages is likely only in certain buying situations-a first- 
time purchase of a product, for instance, or when buying high priced, long-lasting, infre- 
quently purchased articles. This is referred to as complex decision making. 

For many products, the purchasing behavior is a routine affair in which the aroused 
need is satisfied in a habitual manner by repurchasing the same brand. That is, past rein- 
forcement in learning experiences leads directly to buying, and thus the second and third 
stages are bypassed. This is called simple decision making. However, if something changes 
appreciably (price, product, availability, services), the buyer may reenter the full decision 
process and consider alternative brands. Whether complex o, simple, the first step is need 
identification, i 

Need Identification 

Whether we act to resolve a particular problem depends upon two factors: (1) the magni- 
tude of the discrepancy between what we have and what we need, and (2) the importance 
of the problem. A consumer may desire a new Cadillac and own a five-year old Chevrolet. 
The discrepancy may be fairly large, but relatively unimportant compared to the other prob- 



Complex 
decision 
making 





Need 






identification 






■ 


■ 






Information 
search and 
processing 












Identification and 
evaluation of 
alternatives 






i 


- 






Product/service/ 
outlet selection 








' 


f 






Purchase 
decision 










' 


• 






Postpurchase 






bens 


ivior 





Simple 
decision 
making 



FIGURE 4.1 The consumer decision process 



BUYER BEHAVIORAS PROBLEM SOLVING 77 

lems he/she faces. Conversely, an individual may own a car that is two years old and run- 
ning very well. Yet, for various reasons, he/she may consider it extremely important to pur- 
chase a car this year. People must resolve these types of conflicts before they can proceed. 
Otherwise, the buying process for a given product stops at this point, probably in frustration. 

Once the problem is recognized, it must be defined in such a way that the consumer 
can actually initiate the action that will bring about a relevant problem solution. Note that, 
in many cases, problem recognition and oroblem definition occur simultaneously, such as 
a consumer running out of toothpaste. But consider the more complicated probiem involved 
with status and image-how we want others to see us. For example, you may know that 
you are not satisfied with your appearance, but you may not be able to define it any more 
precisely than that. Consumers will not know where to begin solving their problem until 
the problem is adequately defined. 

Marketers can. become involved in the.leed recognition stage in three ways. First, 
they need to know what problems consumers are facing in order to develop a marketing 
mix to help solve these problems. This requires that they measure problem recognition. Sec- 
ond, on occasion, marketers want to activate problem recognition. Public Service Announce- 
ments espousing the dangers of cigarette smoking is an example. Weekend and night shop 
hours are a response of retailers to the consumer problem of limited weekday showing oppor- 
tunities. This problem has become particularly important to families with two working adults. 
Finally, marketers can also shape the definition of the need ocproblem. If a consumer needs 
a new coal, does he define the problem as a need for inexpensive covering , a way to stay 
warm on the coldest days, a garment that will last several years, warm covering that will 
not attract odd looks from his peers, or an article of clOthmg that will express his personal 
sense of style? A salesperson or an ad may shape his imswers. 

Information Search and Processing 

After a need is recognized, the prospective consumer may seek information to help iden- 
tify and evaluate alternative products, services, and outlets that will meet that need. Such 
information can come from family, friends, personal observation, or other sources, such as 
Consumer Reports, salespeople, or mass meciia. The promotional component of the mar- 
keters offering is aimed at providing information to assist the consumer in their problem- 
solving process. In some cases, the consumer already has the needed information based on 
past purchasing and consumption experience. Bad experiences and lack of satisfaction can 
destroy repeat purchases. The consumer with a need for tires may look for information in 
the local newspaper or ask friends for recommendation. If he has bought tires before and 
was satisfied, he may go to the same dealer and buy the same brand. 

Information search can also identify new needs. As a tire shoppe; looks for infor- 
mation, she may decide that the tires are not the real problem, that the need is for a new 
car. At this point, the perceived need may change, triggering a new informational search. 

Information search involves mental as welJ as the physical activities that consumers 
must perform in order to make decisions and accomplish desired goals in the marketplace. 
It takes time, energy, money, and can oftel" involve foregoing more desirable activities . The 
benefits of information search, however, can outweigh the costs. For example, engaging in 
a thorough information search may save money, improve quality of selection, or reduce tisks. 
As noted in the Integrated Marketing box, the Internet is a valuable information source 

Information Processing 

When the search actually occurs, what do people do with the information? How GO they 
spot, understand, and recall information? In other words, how do they process information? 
This broad topic is important for understanding buyer behavior in general as well as effective 



78 CHAPTER 4 UNDERSTANDING BUYER BEHAVIOR 



communication with buyers in particular, and it has received a great deal of study. Assess- 
ing how a person processes information is not an easy task. Often observation has served 
as the basis. Yet there are many theories as to how the process takes place. One widely 
accepted theory proposes a five step sequence. 2 

1. Exposure. Information processing starts with the exposure of consumers to some 
source of stimulation such as watching television, going to the supermarket, or 
receiving direct mail advertisements at home. In order to start the process, mar- 
keters must attract consumers to the stimulus or put it squarely in the path of peo- 
ple in the target market. 

2. Attention. Exposure alone does little unless peopie pay attention to the stimulus. 
AtaJlY moment, people are bombarded by all sorts of stimuli, but they have a lim- 
ited capacity to process this input. They must devote mental resources to stimuli 
in order to process them; in other words, they must pay attention. Marketers can 
increase the likelihood of attention by providing inforrrational cues that are rel- 
evant to the buyer. 

3. Perception . Perception involves classifying the incoming signals into meaningful 
categories, forming patterns, and assigning names or images to them. Perception 
is the assignment of meaning to stimuli received through the senses. (More will 
be said about perception later.) 

4. Retention. Storage of information for later reference, or retention, is the fourth 
step of the information-processing sequence. Actually, the role of retention or mem- 
ory in the sequence is twofold. First, memory holds information while it is being 
processed throjghout the sequence. Second, memory stores information for future, 
long-term use. Heavy repetition and "DUtting a message to music are two things 
marketers do to enhance retention. 

5. Retrieval and Application. The process by which information is recovered from 
the memory storehouse ir. called retrieval. Application is putting that information 



KIDS ARE HOOKED ONLINE 



These days, practically even the tiniest of tykes is tech-savvy. pled with the fact that 19% of these kids have a credit card 

And it's no wonder. There are computers in elementary in bis or her own name and 9% have access to a parent's card 

schools, computer games, and, of course, there is educational to shop online, adds up to a huge customer base for Internet 

software. marketers. 

Kids spend a lot of time online, not just at school, but also Snowball.com is a portal that claims to serve both Gen Y 
at home, for social interaction and entertainment. According and Gen X youth. It includes ChickClick.com for young 
to market researcher Teen Research Unlimited, 62% of women, IGN.com for young men, Power Students.com for 
teenagers say they log on at home for 4.2 hours a week, while high school and college students, and lnsideGuide.com for 
46% spend 2.3 hours a week using a computer outside the college students. The portal has inked deals with major mar- 
home. Teens say they spend most of their online time doing keters, including Sony, Toyota, and Pillsbury. The site also 
research (72%), sending and reading email (63%), playing has received a lot of interest from the entertainment world, 
games (28 %), and checking out things to buy or making pur- 
chases (23%). Sources: Jennifer Gilbert, "New Teen Obsession," Advertising 

Internet consultancy Cyber Dialogue Data reveals the num- Age, February 14,2000, p. 8; "School Daze," American Demo- 

ber of teenagers going online at least once a month grew by graphics, August 1999, p. 80; Krestina Filiciano, "Just Kidding," 

nearly 270% between 1998 and 1999. That frequency, COU- Adweek, May 1,2000, p. 58. 



BUYER BEHAVIOR AS PROBLEM SOLVING 79 

into the right context. If the buyer can retrieve relevant information about a prod- 
uct, brand, or store, he or she will apply it to solve a problem or meet a need. 

Variations in how each step is carried out in the information-processing sequence also occur. 
Especially influential is the degree of elaboration. Elaborate processing, also called cen- 
tral processing, involves active manipulation of information. A person engaged in elabo- 
rate processing pays close attention to a message and thinks about it; he or she develops 
thoughts in support of or counter to the information received. In contrast, nonelaborate, or 
peripherial, processing involves passive manipulation of information. 3 It is demonstrated 
by most airline passengers while a flight attendant reads preflight safety procedures. This 
degree of elaboration closely parallels the low-involvement, high-involvement theory, and 
the same logic applies. 

Identification and Evaluation of Alternatives 

After information is secured and processed, alternative products, services, and outlets are 
identified as viable options. The consumer evaluates these alternatives, and, if financially 
and psychologically able, makes a choice. The criteria used in evaluation varies from con- 
sumer to consumer just as the needs and information sources vary. One consumer may con- 
sider price most important while another puts more weight upon quality or convenience. 
The search for alternatives and the methods used in the search are influenced by such 
factors as: (1) time and money costs; (2) how much information the consumer already 'las; 
(3) the amount of the perceived risk if a wrong selection is made; and (4) the consumer's 
predisposition toward particular choices as influenced by the attitude of the individual toward 
choice behavior. That is, there are individuals who find the selection process to be difficult 
and disturbing. For these people there is a tendency to keep the number of alternatives to 
a minimum, even if they haven't gone through an extensive information search to find that 
their alternatives appear to be the very best. On the other hand, there are individuals who 
feel it necessary to collect a long list of alternatives. This tendency can appreciably slow 
down the decision-making function. 

Product/Service/Outlet Selection 

The selection of an alternative in many cases will require additional evaluation. For exam- 
ple, a consumer may select a favorite brand and go to a convenient outlet to make a pur- 
chase. Upon arrival at the dealer, the consumer finds that the desired brand is out-of-stock. 
At this point, additional evaluation is needed to decide whether to wait until the product 
comes in, accept a substitute, or go to another outlet. The selection and evaluation phases 
of consumer problem solving are closely related and often run sequentially, with outlet selec- 
tion influencing product evaluation, or product selection influencing outlet evaluation. 

The Purchase Decision 

After much searching and evaluating, or perhaps very little, consumers at some point have 
to decide whether they are going to buy. Anything marketers can do to simplify purchas- 
ing will be attractive to buyers. In their advertising marketers could suggest the best size 
for a particular use, or the right wine to drink with a particular food. Sometimes several 
decision situations can be combined and marketed as one package. For example, travel agellts 
often package travel tours. 

To do a better marketing job at this stage of the buying process, a seller needs to know 
answers to many questions about consumers' shopping behavior. For instance, how much 
effort is the consumer willing to spend in shopping for the product? What factors influence 
when the consumer will actually purchase? Are there any conditions that would prohibit 
or delay purchase? Providing basic product, price, and location information through labels, 



80 CHAPTER 4 UNDERSTANDING BUYER BEHAVIOR 



advertising, personal selling, and public relations is an obvious starting point. Produc' sam- 
pling, coupons, and rebates may also provide an extra incentive to buy. 

Actually determining how a consumer goes through the decision-making process is 
a difficult research task. As indicated in the Newsline box, there are new research methods 
to better assess this behavior. 



NEWSLINE: FOL WW THE CONSUMER AND SEE 
~miAT HAPPENS 

It seems that traditional market research no longer works with an 
increasingly diverse and fickle customer base. The methods marketers 
have relied on for decades-perfunctory written and phone surveys- 
merely skim the surface of the shifting customer profile. Says Larry 
Keeiey, president of the Doblin Group, a Chicago-based design and 
consulting firm: "The surveys are nothing more than tracking studies 
designed to measure if customers are a little more or a little less 
pleased with you than they were last year." 

Surely there must be a better way. Wise heads in the arcane world 
of customer research are onto something called storytelling. These 
folks advocate far more probing research than ever before, advising 
companies to elicit real-life stories from customers about how they 
behave and what they truly feel. The notion may seem like a leap into 
the unknown, but some companies have discovered that these story- 
telling methods work. Great service and. ultimately, breakthrough 
products have resulted. Kimberly-Clark built a new $500-million dia- 
per market using in-depth customer research. At Intuit, storytelling 
customers helped its software writers revolutionize the way people all 
over the U.S. handle their money. Clothing maker Patagonia, solicit- 
ing true tales about how customers live and use their gear, manages 
to keep its product ahead of the curve. 

At the heart of this new brand of customer research is a search for 
subtle insight into human behavior-not only emotion-laden anec- 
dotes, but also unspoken impulses. Just think, for example, of the 
last time you made eye contact with an attractive stranger. A whole 
range of feelings washed over you. and at that moment it would be 
hard to argue with the notion that at least 80% of all human commu- 
nication is nonverbal. 

At Patagonia, an outdoor-sports apparel company in Ventura. Cali- 
fornia, customer storytellers surf at the "Point" right outside the front 
door of headquarters . Founder Yoon Chouinard. who spends at least 
six months a year at the ends of the earth testing his company's gear 
himself, has made a point of hiring several of these customers so they 
could share their war stories in-house. He refers to them affection- 
ately as his "dirtbags." people who spend so much time outside that it 
shows under their fingernails. 

Patagonians collect such war stories from far-flung customers as 
well and use them as a marketing tool. Many of their wares are sold 
through a biennial catalogue that is unique among its peers. Instead 
of spending millions to shoot glossy spreads of unthinkably beautiful 
models, the company relies on its customers to pose while wearing 
Patagonia duds in exotic locales. This pictorial road map of customer 
adventl'res makes for great reading, but it has another role as well. 



3UYER BEHAVIOR AS PROBLEM SOLVING 8 1 

The placement of customers' stories front and center proves that their 
opinions and experience are valued, and they respond in droves. "We 
have trained them to believe that we are serious about responding to 
their feedback and improving our products," notes Randy howard. 
the company's director of quality. 

Sources: Joanne Gordon, "Shrink Rap," Fortune, February 7. 2000, pp. 
110-111: Ronald B. Liebier, "Storytelling: A New Way to Get Close to the Cus- 
tomer," Fortune, February 3, 1997, pp. 102-1 05; Kendra Darko, "Zooming In 
On What's Important," American Demographics, August 1999, pp. 46-47. 



Postpurchase Behavior 

All the behavior determinants and the steps of the buying process up to this point are oper- 
ative before or during the time a purchase is made. However, a consumer's feelings and 
evaluations after the sale are also significant to a marketer, because they can influence repeat 
sales and also influence what the customer tells others about the prodl'ct or brand. 

Keeping the customer happy is what marketing is all about. Neveri:hele"s, consumers 
typically experience some postpurchase anxiety after all but the most routine and inexpensive 
purchases. This anxiety reflects a phenomenon called cognitive dissonance. According to 
this theory, people strive for consistency among their cognitions (knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, 
values). When there are inconsistencies, dissonance exists, which people will try to elimi- 
nate. In some cases, the consumer makes the decision to buy a particular brand already aware 
of dissonant elements. In othe" instance 1 :, dissonance is aroused by disturbing information 
that is received after the purchase. 4 The marketer may take specific steps to reduce post- 
purchase dissonance. Advertising that stresses the many positive attributes or confirms the 
popularity of the product can be helpful. Providing personalized reinforcement has proven 
effective with big-ticket items such as automobiles and major appliances. Salespeople in 
these areas may send cards or may even make personal calls in order to reassure customers 
about their purchase. 



Buyer behavior takes place in an exchange setting and b. Information search and processing is a five-step 
addresses two questions: sequence: 

a. How do potential buyer, go about making purchase 1. Exposure 
decisions? 2. Attention 

b. What factors influence their decision process and in 3. Reception 
what way? 4. Retention 

Buyer behavior is a problem-solving process and entaiL 5. Retrieval and application 

the following decisions: c - Identification and evaluation of alLernatives 

a. Need identification d. Product/service/outlet selection 

1. Determined by the discrepancy between what we e - The purchase decision 
have and what we want '■ Postpurchase behavior 

2. Determined by the relative importance of the 
problem 



82 



CHAPTER 4 UNDERSTANDING BUYER BEHAVIOR 



Influencing Factors of Consumer Behavior 

While the decision-making process appears quite standardized, no two people make a deci- 
sion in exactly the same way. As individuals, we have inherited and learned a great many 
behavioral tendencies: some controllable, some beyond our control. Further, the ways in 
which all these factors interact with one another ensures uniqueness. Although it is impos- 
sible for a marketer to react to the particular profile of a single consumer, it is possible to 
identify factors that tend to influence most consumers in predictable ways 

The factor;; that influence the consumer problem-solving process are numerous and 
complex. For example, the needs of men and women are different in respect to cosmetics; 
the extent of infonnation search for a low-income person would be much greater when con- 
sidering a new au::omobile sr, opposed to a loaf of bread; a consumer with extensive past 
purchasing experience in a product category might well approach the problem differently 
from one with no experience. Such influences must be understood to draw realistic con- 
clusions about consumer behavior. 

For purposes of discussion, it may be helpful to group these various influences into 
related sets. Figure 4.2 provides Such a framework. Situational, external, and internal influ- 
ences are shown as having an impact on the consumer problem solving process. Situation 
influences include the consumer's immediate buying task, the market offerings that are avail- 
able to the consumer, and demographic traits. Internal influences relate to the consumer's 
learning and socialization, motivation and personality, and lifestyle. External influences deal 
with factors outside the individual that have a strong bearing on personal behaviors. Cur- 
rent purchase behavior is shown as influencing future behavior through the internal influ- 
ence of learning. Let us now turn to the nature and potential impact of each of these sets 
of influences on consumer problem solving. Figure 4.2 focuses on the specific elements 
that influence the consumer's decision to purchase and evaluate products and services. 

Situational Influences 

Buying Task The nature of the buying task has considerable impact on a customer's 
approach to solving a particular problem. When a decision involves a low-cost item that is 



SITUATIONAL INFLUENCES 



Market offerings 

Demographics 

Complexity 



EXTERNAL INFLUENCES 



Cultural 
Social class 
Reference groups 



INTERNAL FACTORS AND PROCESSES 



Psychological 
Characteristics 

- Motivation 

- Learning/socialization 

- Personality 

- Attitudes 

- Lifestyle 



Decision Making 

- Recognize needs 

- Search for 
information 

- Evaluate alternatives 

- Make purchase 

- Postpurchase 



Experience 



1 



u 



I Purchase and Evaluation I 



FIGURE 4.2 A model of consumer behavior 



BUYER BEHAVIOR AS PROBLEM SOLVING 



83 



frequently purchased, such as bread, the buying process is typically quick and routinized. 
A decision concerning a new car is quite different. The extent to which a decision is con- 
sidered complex or simple depends on (1) whether the decision is novel or routine, and on 
(2) the extent of the customers' involvement with the decision. A great deal of discussion 
has revolved around this issue of involvement. High-involvement decisions are those that 
are important to the buyer. Such decisions are closely tied to the consumer's ego and self- 
image. They also involve some risk to the consumer; financial risk (highly priced item") 



Now you can get 
rid of annoying 
commercials and 




your annoying 



cable company at 



the same time. 




AD 4.1 Ordering DishPVR is a high-involvement decision. 



84 CHAPTER 4 UNDERSTANDING BUYER BEHAVIOR 



social risk (products important to the peer group), or psychological risk (the wrong deci- 
sion might cause the consumer some concern and anxiety). In making these decisions, it 
is worth the time anci energies to consider solution alternatives carefully. A complex process 
of decision making is therefore more likely for high-involvement purchases. Low-involvement 
decisions are more straightforward, require little risk, are repetitive, and often lead to a habit: 
they are not very important to the consumer. s Financial, social, and psychological risks are 
not nearly as great. In such cases, it may not be worth the consumer's time and effort to 
search for information about brands or to consider a wide range of alternatives. A low- 
involvement purchase therefore generally entails a limited process of decision making. The 
purchase of a new computer is an example of high involvement, while the purchase of a 
hamburger is a low-involvement decision. 

When a consumer has bought a similar product many times in the past, the decision 
making is likely to be simple, regardless of whether it is a high- or low -involvement deci- 
sion. Suppose a consumer initially bought a product after much care and involvement, was 
satisfied, and continued to buy the product. The customer's careful consideration of the prod- 
uct and sathfaction has produced brand loyalty, which is the result of involvement with the 
product decision. 

Once a customer is brand-loyal, a simple decision-making process is all that is required 
for subsequent purchases. The consumer now buys the product through habit, which means 
making a decision without the use of additional information or the evaluation of alterna- 
tive choices. 

Market Offerings Another relevant set of situational influences on consumer prob- 
lem solving is the available market offerings. The more extensive the product and brand 
choices available to the consumer, the more complex the purchase decision process is likely 
to be. 

For example, if you already have purchased or are considering purchasing a DVD, 
you know there are many brands to choose from-Sony, Samsung, Panasonic, Mitsubishi, 
Toshiba, and Sanyo, to name several. Each manufacturer sells several models that differ 
in terms of some of the following features- single or multiple event selection, remote 
cODtrol (wired or wireless), slow motion, stop action, variable-speed scan, tracking con- 
trol, and so on. What criteria are important to you? Is purchasing a DVD an easy deci- 
sion? If a consumer has a need that can be met by only one product or one outlet in the 
relevant market, the decision is relatively simple. Either purchase the product or let the 
need go unmet. 

This is not ideal from the customer' s perspective, but it can occur. For example, sup- 
pose you are a student on a campus in a small town many miles from another marketplace. 
Your campus and town has only one bookstore. You need a textbook for class; only one 
specific book will do and only one outlet has the book for sale. The limitation on alterna- 
tive market offerings can clearly influence your purchase behavior. 

As you saw in the DVD example, when the extent of market offerings increases, the 
complexity of the problem- solving process and the consumers' need for information also 
increases. A wider selection of market offerings is better from the customer's point of view, 
because it allows them to tailor their purchases to their specific needs. However, it may 
confuse and frustrate the consumer so that less-than-optimal choices are made. 

Demographic Influences An important set of factors that should not be overlooked 
in attempting to understand and respond to consumers is demographics. Such variables as 
age, sex, income, education, marital status, and mobility can all have significant influence 
on consumer behavior. One study showed that age and education have strong relationships 



BUYER BEHAVIOR AS PROBLEM SOLVING 85 

to store selection by female shoppers. This was particularly true for women's suits or dresses, 
linens and bedding, cosmetics, and women's sportswear. 

DeBeers Limited, which has an eighty percent share of the market for diamonds used 
in engagement rings, employed a consumer demographic profile in developing their pro- 
motional program. Their target market consists of single women and men between the ages 
of 18 and 24. They combined this profile with some lifestyle aspects to develop their pro- 
motional program. 

People in different income brackets also tend to buy different types of products and 
different qualities. Thus various income groups often shop in very different ways. This means 
that income can be an important variable in defining the target group. Many designer cloth- 
ing shops, for example, aim at higher-income shoppers, while a store like K-mart appeals 
to middle- and lower-income groups 

External Influences 

External factors are another important set of influences on consumer behavior. Among the 
many societal elements that can affect consumer problem solving are culture, social class, 
reference groups, and family. 

Culture A person's culture is represented by a large group of people with a simi- 
lar heritage. The American culture, which is a subset of the Western culture, is of primary 
interest here. Traditional American culture values include hard work, thrift, achievement, 
security, and the like. Marketing strategies targeted to those with such a cultural heritage 
should show the product or service as reinforcing these traditional values. The three com- 
ponents of culture-beliefs, values, and customs-are each somewhat different. A beliefis 
a proposition that reflects a person's particular knowledge and assessment of something 
(that is, "I believe that . . ."). Values are general statements that guide behavior and influ- 
ence beliefs. The function of a value system is to help a person choose between alterna- 
tives in everyday life. 

Customs are overt modes of behavior that constitute culturally approved ways of behav- 
ing in specific situations. For example, taking one's mother out for dinner and buying her 
presents for Mother's Day is an American custom that Hallmark and other card companies 
support enthusiastically. 

The American culture with its social values can be divided into various subcultures. 
For example, African- Americans constitute a significant American subculture in most U.S. 
cities. A consumer's racial heritage can exert an influence on media usage and various other 
aspects of the purchase decision process. 

Social Class Social class, which is detennined by such factors as occupation, wealth, 
income, education, power, and prestige, is another societal factor that can affect consumer 
behavior. The best-known classification system includes upper-upper, lower-upper, upper- 
middle, lower-middle, upper-lower, and lower-lower class. Lower-middle and upper-lower 
classes comprise the mass market. 

The upper-upper class and lower-upper class consist of people from wealthy fami- 
lies who are locally prominent. They tend to live in large homes furnished with art and 
antiques. They are the primary market for rare jewelry and designer originals, tending to 
shop at exclusive retailers. The upper-middle class is made up of professionals, managers, 
and business owners. The are ambitious, future-oriented people who have succeeded eco- 
nomically and now seek to enhance their quality of life. Material goods often take on major 
symbolic meaning for this group. They also tend to be very civic-minded and are involved 
in many worthy causes. The lower-middle class consists of mid-level white-collar workers. 



86 CHAPTER 4 UNDERSTANDING BUYER BEHAVIOR 



These are office workers, teachers, small business people and the like who typically hold 
strong American values. They are family-oriented, hard-working individuals. The tippd- 
lower class is made up of blue-collar workers such as production line workers and service 
people. Many have incomes that exceed those of the lower-middle class, but their valuer: 
are often very different. They tend to adopt a short-run, live-for-the-present philosophy. They 
are less future-oriented than the middle classes . The lower-lower class consists of unskilled 
workers with low incomes. They are more concerned with necessities than with status or 
fulfillment. 

People in the same social class tend to have similar attitudes, live in similar neigh- 
borhoods, dress alike, and shop at the same type stores . I f a marketer wishes to target efforts 
toward the upper classes, then the market offering must be designed to meet their expec- 
tations in terms of quality, service, and atmosphere. For example, differences in leisure- 
concerts are favored by members of the middle and upper classes, while fishing, bowling, 
pool, and drive-in movies are more likely to involve members of the lower social classes. 

Reference Groups Do you ever wonder why Pepsi used Shaquille O'Neal in their 
advertisements? The teen market consumes a considerable amount of soft drinks . Pepsi has 
made a strong effort to capture a larger share of this market, and felt that Shaquille repre- 
sented the spirit of today's teens. Pepsi is promoted as "the choice of a new generation" 
and Shaquille is viewed as a role model by much of that generation. Pepsi has thus employed 
the concept of reference groups . 

A reference group helps shape a person's attitudes and behaviors. Such groups can 
be either formal or informal. Churches, clubs, schools, notable individuals, and friends can 
all be reference groups for a particular consumer. Reference groups are characterized as 
having individuals who are opinion leaders for the group. Opinion leaders are people who 
influence others. They are not necessarily higher-income or better educated, but perhaps 
are seen as having greater expertise or knowledge related to some specific topic. For exam- 
ple, a local high school teacher may be an opinion leader for parents in selecting college:; 
for their children. These people set the trend and others conform to the expressed behav- 
ior. I f a marketer can identify the opinion leaders for a group in the target market, then effort 
can be directed toward attracting these individuals. For example, if an ice cream parlor is 
attempting to attract the local high school trade, opinion leaders at the school may be very 
important to its success . 

The reference group can influence an individual in several ways:6 

1. Role expectations: The role assumed by a person is nothing more than a prescribed 
way of behaving based on the situation and the person's position in the situation. 
Your reference group determines much about how this role is to be performed. 
As a student, you are expected to behave in a certain basic way under certain con- 
ditions. 

2. Conformity: Conformity is related to our roles in that we modify our behavior in 
order to coincide with group norms. Norms are behavioral expectations that are 
considered appropriate regardless of the position we hold. 

3. Group communications through opinion leaders: We, as consumers, are constantly 
seeking out the advice of knowledgeable friends or acquaintances who can pro- 
vide information, give advice, or actually make the decision. For some product 
categories, there are professional opinion leaders who are quite easy to identify - 
e.g., auto mechanics, beauticians, stockbrokers, and physicians. 



BUYER BEHAVIOR AS PROBLEM SOLVING 81 

Family One of the most important reference groups for an individual is the fam- 
ily. A consumer's family has a major impact on attitude and behavior. The interaction between 
husband and wife and the number and ages of children in the family can have a significant 
effect on buying behavior. 

One facet in understanding the family's impact on consumer behavior is identifying 
the decision maker for the purchase in question. In some cases, the husband is typically dom- 
inant, in others the wife or children, and still others, ajoint decision is made. The store choice 
for food and household items is most often the wife's. With purchases that involve a larger 
sum of money, such as a refrigerator, ajoint decision is usually made. The decision on cloth- 
ing purchases for teenagers may be greatly influenced by the teenagers themselves. Thus, 
marketers need to identify the key family decision maker for the product or service in question. 

Another aspect of understanding the impact of the family on buying behavior is the 
family lifecycle. Most families pass through an orderly sequence of stages. These stages 
can be defined by a combination of factors such as age, marital status, and parenthood. The 
typical stages are: 

1. The bachelor state; young, single people. 

2. Newly married couples; young, no children. 

3. The full nest I and II; young married couples with dependent children: 

a. Youngest child under six (Full nest I) 

b. Youngest child over six (Full nest II) 

4. The full nest III; older married couples with dependent children. 

5. The empty nest I and II; older married couples with no children living with them: 

a. Adults in labor force (Empty nest I) 

b. Adults retired (Empty nest II) 

6. The solitary survivors; older single people: 

a. In labor force 

b. Retired 

Each of these stages is characterized by different buying behaviors. For example, a chil- 
dren's clothing manufacturer would target its efforts primarily at the full nest I families. 
Thus, the family cycle can be helpful in defining the target customers . 

Internal Influences 

Each customer is to some degree a unique problem solving unit. Although they can be grouped 
into meaningful segments, in order to fully appreciate the totality of the buying process, a 
marketer needs to examine the internal forces that influence consumers. They are learn- 
ing/socialization, motivation and personality, and lifestyle. 

Learning and Socialization As a factor influencing a person's perceptions, learn- 
ing may be defined as changes in behavior resulting from previous experiences. However, 
learning does not include behavior changes attributable to instinctive responses, growth, or 
temporary states of the organism, such as hunger, fatigue, or sleep. It is clear that learning 
is an ongoing process that is dynamic, adaptive, and subject to change. Also, learning is an 
experience and practice that actually brings about changes in behavior. For example, in order 
to learn how to play tennis, you might participate in it to gain experience, be exposed to 
the different skills required, the rules, and so forth. However, the experience does not have 
to be an actual, physical one. It could be a conceptualization of a potential experience. In 



88 CHAPTER 4 UNDERSTANDING BUYER BEHAVIOR 



other words, yOll could learn to play tennis by reading about how to play without actually 
doing it. This is called nonexperientiallearning. 

Nonexperientiallearning is particularly relevant in consumer behavior. For example, 
assume you are considering purchasing a bottle of Zinfandel wine. You ask the salesclerk 
what it tastes like, and he tells you it tastes like a strong ginger ale. Not liking the taste of 
ginger ale, you reject the purchase. Thus you have learned that you do not like Zinfandel 
wine without having a direct taste experience. A great deal of our learning is of this type. 
This may be one reason why marketers try to identify opinions leaders who in turn tell oth- 
ers in the market about the benefits of the product. 

Another characteristic of learning is that the changes may be immediate or antici- 
pated. In other words, just because we do not see immediate evidence that learning has taken 
place is no reason to assume that learning has not occurred. 'Ne can store our learning until 
it i:; needed, and frequently do this in terms of making purchase decisions. For example, 
we are willing to learn about many product attributes even though we do not expect to buy 
the product in the near future. 

As new information is processed and stored over lime, consumer learning takes place 
There are several theories of learning: one of the most useful to marketers is that of social- 
ization. Socialization refers CO the process by which persons acquire the knowledge, skills, 
and dispositions that make them more or less able members of their society. The assump- 
tion made is that behavior is acquired and modified over the person's l^fecycle. 

The social learning approach stresses sources of influence-"socialization agents" 
(i.e., other people)-that transmit cognitive and behavioral patterns to the learner. In the 
case of consumer socialization, this takes place in the course of the person's interaction 
with other individuals in various social settings. Socialization agents might include any per- 
son, organization, or information source that comes into contact with the consumer. 

Consumers acquire this infOlmation from the other individuals through the processes 
of modeling, reinforcement, and social interaction Modeling involves imitation of the agent's 
behavior. For example, a teenager may acquire a brand name preference for !zod from friends. 
Marketers can make use of this concept by employing spokespersons to endorse their prod- 
ucts and services who have strong credibility with their target consumers, as in the case of 
Bill Cosby (Jell-G). Reinforcement involves either a reward or a punishment mechanism 
used by the agent. A parent may be reinforced by good product performance, excellent post- 
purchase services, or some similar rewarding experience. The social interaction mechanism 
is less specific as to the type of learning involved; it may include a combination of moo- 
eling and reinforcement. The social setting within which learning takes place can be defined 
in terms of variables such as social class, sex, and family size. 

These variables can influence learning through their impact on the relationship between 
the consumer and others. It should be noted that an individual who promotes learning can 
be anyone-such as parent, friend, salesperson, or television spokesperson. 

Motivation Motivation is a concept that is difficult to define. In fact, the difficulty 
of defining motives and dealing with motivation in consumer research accounts for its lim- 
ited application. For the most part, the research in motivation involves benefit segmenta- 
tion and patronage motives. Patronage motives typically concern the consumer's reasons 
for shopping at a particular oudet. Consumers are classified, for example, as price-conscious, 
convenience-oriented, service-oriented, or in terms of some other motivating feature. 

A motive is the inner drive or pressure to take action to satisfy a need. To be moti- 
vated is to be a goal-oriented individual. Some goals are positive, some are negative, some 
indiv:duals have a high level of goal orientation, some have a very low level. In all cases, 
the 1 leed must be aroused or stimulated to a high enough level so that it can serve as a motive. 



BUYER BEHAVIOR AS PROBLEM SOLVING 89 

It is possible (and usual) to have needs that are latent (unstimulated) and that therefore do 
not serve as the motive of behavior. The sources of this arousal may be internal (people get 
hungry), environmental (you see an ad for a Big Mac), or psychological (just thinking about 
food can cause hunger). It is possible (and usual) to have needs that are latent (unstimu- 
lated) and that therefore do not serve as the motive of behavior. 

For motivation to be useful in marketing practice, a marketing manager must under- 
stand what motives and behaviors are influenced by the specific situation in which con- 
sumers engage in goal -directed, problem-solving behavior. 

Motivation flows from an unmet need, as does all consumer problem solving. Per- 
haps the best known theory dealing with individual motivation is provided in the work of 
A.H. Maslow. One of the most important parts of Maslow's theory is his development of 
a model consisting of several different levels of needs that exist in a human being and relate 
to each other via a "need hierarchy." Maslow has differentiated between five levels of needs. 
The first of these concerns itself with physiological needs ; that is, hunger, thirst, and other 
basic drives. All living beings, regardless of their level of maturity, possess physiological 
needs. Physiological needs are omnipresent and are of a recurrent nature. 7 

Safety and security needs are second in Maslow's hierarchy. The difference between 
physiological needs and safety and security needs is somewhat hazy. Safety and security 
imply a continued fulfillment of physiological needs. This is an extension of the more basic 
needs. 

Third in Maslow's hierarchy of needs are the love needs. These are the needs for belong- 
ing and friendship . They involve a person's interaction with others. The fourth level of needs 
in Maslow's hierarchy is the esteem needs. These are needs related to feeling good about 
oneself and having a positive self-image. 

The fifth and highest level in Maslow's needs hierarchy is the need for self-actualization 
or self- fulfillment. This need can be defined as the need of a person to reach his full poten- 
tial in terms of the application of his own abilities and interest in functioning in his envi- 
ronment. 

It is important in discussing these levels of Maslow's hierarchy to point out two addi- 
tional factors. First, Maslow has clearly indicated that these five levels of needs operate on 
an unconscious level. That is, the individual is probably not aware of concentration upon 
one particular need or one assortment of needs. One of the misunderstandings associated 
with Maslow's theory is that he believes the five needs to be mutually exclusive. That, in 
fact, is not the intent of Maslow. To the contrary, several of these needs may occur simul- 
taneously for anyone individual; the relative importance of each need for anyone indi- 
vidual determines the hierarchy involved. 

When we attempt to integrate Maslow's needs hierarchy with the concept of seg- 
mentation, we can see that a manager might find certain subgroups that fit together because 
of some homogeneity of needs. For example, a marketer may target a group with strong 
self-esteem needs in designing a promotional program for cosmetics. Appeals to higher- 
order needs are important for many products and services, even basic commodities. 

Personality is used to summarize all the traits of a person that make him/her unique. 
No two people have the same traits , but several attempts have been made to classify peo- 
ple with similar traits. Perhaps the best-known personality types are those proposed by Carl 
Jung, as is a variation on the work of his teacher, Sigmund Freud. His personality cate- 
gories are introvert and extrovert. The introvert is described as defensive, inner-directed, 
and withdrawn from others. The extrovert is outgoing, other-directed, and assertive. Sev- 
eral other more elaborate classifications have also been devised. 

Various personality types, like people with various motives, are likely to respond in 
different ways to different market offerings. For example, an extrovert may enjoy the shopping 



90 CHAPTER 4 UNDERSTANDING BUYER BEHAVIOR 



experience and rely more on personal observation to secure information; thus, in-store pro- 
motion would become an important communication tool. Knowing the basic personality 
traits of target customers can be useful information for the manager in designing the mar- 
keting mix. Marketers have, however, found personality to be difficult to apply in devel- 
oping marketing strategy. The primary reason for this is the lack of good ways to measure 
personality traits. Most available measures were developed to identify people with prob- 
lems that needed medical attention. These have little value with consumers who are men- 
tally healthy. As a result, most marketers have turned to lifestyle analysis. 

Lifestyle One of the newer and increasingly important set of factors that is being 
used to understand consumer behavior is lifestyle. Lifestyle has been generally defined as 
the attitudes, interests, and opinions of the potential customer. Such variables as interest in 
hunting, attitude toward the role of women in society, and opinion on the importance of 
dressing well can be used to better understand the market and its behavior. 

It is the multifaceted aspect of lifestyle research that makes it so useful in consumer 
analysis. A prominent lifestyle researcher, Joseph T. Plummer, summarizes the concept as 
follows: 

. .. life style patterns, combines the virtues oj demographics with the richness and 
dimensionality ojpsychological characteristics. . . . Life style is used to segment the 
marketplace because it provides the broad, everyday view oj consumers life style seg- 
mentation and can generate identifiable whole persons rather than isolatedjragments. 8 

A useful application of the lifestyle concept relates to consumer's shopping orienta- 
tion. Different customers approach shopping in very different ways. They have different 
attitudes and opinions about shopping and different levels of interest in shopping. Once peo- 
ple know their alternatives, how do they evaluate and choose among them? In particular, 
how do people choose among brands of a product? Current description of this process empha- 
sizes the role of attitudes. An attitude is an opinion of a person, idea, place, or thing. Atti- 
tudes range based on a continuum from very negative to very positive. Traditionally, an attitude 
is broken down into three components: cognitive, affective, and behavioral. That is, an atti- 
tude is first what we know/believe, followed by what we feel, and ending with an action. 
Thus, we have learned that a particular company has been polluting a local river; we feel 
very strongly that business shouldn't do this and feel very angry; and we boycott the prod- 
uct madt by that company. 

A great deal of marketing strategy is based on the idea that the cognitive, affective, 
and behavioral components of an attitude tend to be consistent. Thus, if it is possible to 
change what people believe about Yamaha CD players, their feelings and their actions may 
eventually change as well. However, this relationship among the three components of an 
attitude seems to be situation- or even product-specific. For example, attitudes tend to pre- 
dict behavior better in high-involvement decisions. Thus, if someone has a strong attitude 
about wearing stylish clothes, then it is possible to predict that the person will restrict pur- 
chases to a particular set of brands. Furthermore, we do not react to products in isolation. 
The situation, or our attitude toward the situation, plays an important role in how well atti- 
tudes predict behavior. For example, assume that a consumer likes pizza but doesn't like 
Pizza Inn pizza. In a social setting where everyone wants to go to Pizza Inn for pizza, this 
person might eat this brand rather than not have pizza at all. 

Despite limitations on the predictive power of attitudes, attitudes can help us 
understand how choices are made. However, we need to carefully assess the validity of the 
attitude-behavior relationships for each situation and product. 



ORGANIZATIONAL BUYER BEHAVIOR 



91 



The following factors influence consumer behavior: 

a. Situational influences 

1. The buyer task: high-involvement vs. low- 
involvement 

2. Market offerings 

3. Demographics 

b. External influences 

1. Culture 

2. Social class 



3. Reference groups 

4. Family 
Internal influences 

1. Learning and socialization 

2. Motivation 

3. Personality 

4. Lifestyle 

5. Attitudes 



Given the hypothesis that attitudes influence buying behavior, how can a company 
bring its products and consumers' attitudes into a consistent state; that is, into a situation 
where consumers evaluate a given product or brand as satisfying their need? Marketers have 
two choices: either they can change consumers' attitudes to be consistent with their prod- 
uct, or they can change the product to match attitudes. It is easier to change the product 
than to change consumers' attitudes. Nevertheless, attitudes can sometimes be modified. 
Modifying attitudes might be the only reasonable choice, as when a firm is introducing a 
truly new product or an unusual new use for an existing one. Marketers should neverthe- 
less face the fact that it is extremely difficult to change consumers' attitudes. If there is to 
be change, it is most likely to occur when people are open-minded in their beliefs or when 
an existing attitude is of weak intensity; that is, when there is little information to support 
the attitude or very little ego involvement on the individual's part. The stronger a person's 
loyalty to a certain brand, for example, the more difficult it is to change that attitude. 



ORGANIZATIONAL BUYER BEHAVIOR 



Those who supply goods and services to consumer markets are themselves in need of 
goods and services to lUn their business. These organizations-producers, resellers, and 
government-make up vast marketing organizations that buy a large variety of products, 
including equipment, raw material, and labor and other services. Some organizations sell 
exclusively to other organizations and never come into contact with consumer buyers. 

Despite the importance of organizational markets, far less research has been conducted 
on factors that influence their behavior than on factors that influence consumers . However, 
we can identify characteristics that distinguish organizational buying from consumer buy- 
ing and typical steps in the organizational buying process. 



Characteristics of Organizational Buying 

Many elements of the sociocultural environment discussed earlier influence organizational 
as well as consumer buying, but some additional forces are salient only in the organiza- 
tional setting. In particular, each organization has its own business philosophy that guides 
its actions in resolving conflicts, handling uncertainty and risk, searching for solutions, and 
adapting to change. For example, Peabody Coal, which is palt of a declining industry, relies 
on a conservative purchase strategy in an attempt to maintain their status quo. 



92 



CHAPTER 4 UNDERSTANDING BUYER BEHAVIOR 





We help e-businesses stlia, manage in ven to ry and i I re am lint 



/ 




Starting a successful e-business takes a great idea. Running one, however, takes order processing, 
inventory piocurement, wsrehousinc; ,>r<rj timely fulfillment, Biter UPS. We'll help you cope with 
success by getting your product to customers when they need it. So you can stop worrying about 
losillg your shirt. Assuming you were even wearing one. Gilll-300-PICK-UPS' or visit ups.com 

MOVING at the SPEED o/BUSINESS; 




AD 4.2 This ad illustrates organization )ehavior decision criteria. 



Five characteristics mark the organizational buying process: 

1. In organizations, many individuals are involved in making buying decisions, 

2. The organizational buyer is motivated by both rajonal and quantitative criteria 
dominant in most organizational decisions; the decision makers are people, sub- 
ject to many of the same emotional criteria used in personal purchases. 



ORGANIZATIONAL BUYER BEHAVIOR 93 

3. Organizational buying decisions frequently involve a range of complex technical 
dimensions . A purchasing agent for Volvo Automobiles, for example, must con- 
sider a number of technical factors before ordering a radio to go into the new model. 
The electronic system, the acoustics of the interior, and the shape of the dashboard 
are a few of these considerations. 

4. The organizational decision process frequently spans a considerable time, creat- 
ing a significant lag between the marketer's initial contact with the customer and 
the purchasing decision. Since many new factors can enter the picture during this 
lag time, the marketer's ability to monitor and adjust to these changes is critical. 

5. Organizations cannot be grouped into precise categories. Each organization has 
a characteristic way of functioning and a personalityjo 

The first item in this list of characteristics has important implications. Unlike the consumer 
buying process, organizational buying involves decision making by groups and enforces 
rules for making decisions. These two characteristics greatly complicate the task of under- 
standing the buying process. For example, to predict the buying behavior of an organiza- 
tion with certainty, it is important to know who will take part in the buying process, what 
criteria each member uses in evaluating prospective suppliers, and what influence each mem- 
ber has. It is also necessary to understand something not only about the psychology of the 
individuals involved but also how they work as a group. Who makes the decision to buy 
depends in part on the situation. Three types of buying situations have been distinguished: 
the straight rebuy, the modified rebuy, and the new task. 

The straight rebuy is the simplest situation: The company reorders a good or service 
without any modifications. The transaction tends to be routine and may be handled totally 
by the purchasing department. With the modified rebuy, the buyer is seeking to modify prod- 
uct specifications, prices, and so on. The purchaser is interested in negotiation, and several 
participants may take part in the buying decision. A company faces a new task when it con- 
siders buying a product for the first time. The number of participants and the amount of 
information sought tend to increase with the cost and risks associated with the transaction . 
This situation represents the best opportunity for the marketer. 

Stages in Organizational Buying 

The organizational buying process contains eight stages, or key phrases, which are listed 
in Figure 4.3. Although these stages parallel those of the consumer buying process, there 
are important differences that have a direct bearing on the marketing strategy. The com- 
plete process occurs only in the case of a new task. Even in this situation, however, the process 
is far more formal for the industrial buying process than for the consumer buying process. 
Most of the information an industrial buyer receives is delivered through direct con- 
tacts such as sales representatives or information packets. It is unlikely that an industrial 
buyer would use information provided through a trade ad as the sole basis for making a 
decision. 

1 . Problem recognition. The process begins when someone in the organization rec- 
ognizes a problem or need that can be met by acquiring a good or service. Prob- 
lem recognition can occur as a result of internal or external stimuli. External stimuli 
can be a presentation by a salesperson, an ad, or information picked up at a trade 
show. 

2. General need description. Having recognized that a need exists, the buyers must 
add further refinement to its description . Working with engineers, users, purchasing 



94 CHAPTER 4 UNDERSTANDING BUYER BEHAVIOR 



Problem 

recognition 



Need 
description 



Product 
apecification 

I 



Supplier 
search 



Proposal 
solicitation 



Supplier 
selection 



Order- routine 
specification 



Performance 

review 



FIGURE 4.3 Stages of organizational buying 



agents, and others, the buyer identifies and prioritizes important product charac- 
teristics. Table 4.1 lists several sources of information for many industrial cus- 
tomers. Armed with extensive product knowledge, this individual is capable of 
addressing virtually all the product-related concerns of a typical customer. To a 
lesser extent, trade advertising provides valuable information to smaller or iso- 
lated customers. Noteworthy is the extensive use of direct marketing techniques 
(for example, toll-free numbers and information cards) in cor.junction with many 
trade ads. Finally, public relations plays a significant role through the placement 
of stories in various trade journals. 

3. Product specification. Technical specifications come next. This is usually the 
responsibility of the engineering department. Engineers design several alternatives, 
depending on the priority list established earher. 

4. Supplier search. The buyer now tries [o identify the most appropriate vendor. The 
buyer can examine trade directories, perfonn a computer search, or phone other 
companies for recommendations. Marketers can participate in this stage by con- 
tacting possible opinion leaders and soliciting support or by contacting the buyer 
directly. Personal selling plays a major role at this Stage. 

5. Proposal solicitation. Qualified suppliers are next invited to submit proposals. 
Some suppliers send only a catalog or a sales representative. Proposal develop- 
ment is a complex task that requires extensive research and skilled wtiting and 
presentation. In extreme cases, such proposals are comparable to complete mar- 
keting strategies found in the consumer sector. 



ORGANIZATIONAL BUYER BEHAVIOR 



95 



TABLE 4.1 


Industrial Buyer 


Information Sources 


Source 




Description 



Salespeople 

Technical sources 
Personnel in buyer's firm 
Purchasing agents in other companies 
Trade association 



Advertising in trade journals 
Articles in trade journals 
Vendor files 
Trade registers 
Product literature 



Sales personnel representing manufacturers or distributors of the product in 
question. 

Engineering types of personnel internal or external to the subject's firm. 

Peer group references (e.g., other purchasing agents in the subject's firm). 

Peer group references external to the buyer's firm. 

Cooperatives voluntarily joined by business competitors designed to assist its 

members and industry in dealing with mutual problems (e.g., National 

Association of Purchasing Management). 
Commercial messages placed by the manufacturer or distributor of the 

product in question. 
Messages relating to the product in question but not under the control of the 

manufacturer or distributor. 
Information pertaining to the values of various sources of supply as developed 

and maintained by the buyer's firm. 
Buyer guides providing listings of suppliers and other marketing information 

(e.g., Thomas'Register). 
Specific product and vendor information supplied by the manufacturing or 

distributing firm. 



6. Supplier selection. At this stage, the various proposals are screened and a choice 
is made. A significant part of this selection is evaluating the vendor. One study 
indicated that purchasing managers felt that the vendor was often more important 
than the proposal. Purchasing managers listed the three most important charac- 
teristics of the vendor as delivery capability, consistent quality, and fair price. 
Another study found that the relative importance of different attributes varies with 
the type of buying situations. 

For example, for routine-order products, delivery, reliability, price, and sup- 
plier reputation are highly important. These factors can serve as appeals in sales 
presentations and in trade ads. 

7. Order-routine specification. The buyer now writes the final order with the cho- 
sen supplier, listing the technical specifications, the quantity needed, the warranty, 
and so on. 

8. Performance review. In this final stage, the buyer reviews the supplier's per- 
formance. This may be a very simple or a very complex process. 



NEWSLINE: THE FUTJRE OF THE CONSUMER 

Experts say consumers in the new millennium will throw some sur- 
prising twists and turns into the business of target marketing, over- 
turning some of the traditional thinking about what we'll buy, how 
we'll live, and where we'll work. "The 21st century will be the century 
of the consumer," says Roger Blackwell, a professor of marketing. 
"Marketers will have to push their understanding beyond knowing 
what people buy to knowing why they buy." The 2010s will be the 
"Linked Decade," defined by a busy, mature, ethnically heterogeneous 



96 CHAPTER 4 UNDERSTANDING BUYER BEHAVIOR 



group of consumers who are confident in their ability to read any- 
thing, buy anything, and experience anything. 

Several fundamental demographic changes will serve as the under- 
pinning for this new consumer mind-set: the aging of the baby boom 
generation, the increasing importance of children as consumers, a 
growing chasm between society's haves and have-nots, and the 
world's increasingly diverse population. 

Given that demographic backdrop, what will be the most powerful 
values shaping the consumer mind-set? The following possibilities 
have been proposed: 

• The Shrinking Day-Harried baby boomers will create a time 
famine for themselves by working more hours and committing to 
more family and community obligations. 

• The Connectedness Craze-The urge to connect will pervade all 
aspects of consumers' lives and increasingly consumers will 
turn to the World Wide Web for a sense of community between 
buyers and sellers, information suppliers and consumers, and 
friends and family. 

• The Body vs. Soul Conundrum-Consumers will continue their 
obsession with fitness and spirituality, while at the same time 
consuming record amounts of take-out food. 

« The Triumph of Individualism- Work, family, and purchase 
processes will reflect the consumer's need to be treated as a 
unique individual. 



1 . Organizational buyer behavior is different from consumer 2. The following stages are involved in the organizational buy- 
behavior: ing decision: 

a. Many individuals make the buying decision a. Problem recognition 

b. Behavior is motivated by both rational and emotional b. General need description 
factors c. Product specification 

c. Decisions include a range of complex technical deci- d. Supplier's research 
sions e. Proposal solicitation 

d. Lag time exists between contact and actual decision f. Supplier selection 

e. Organizations cannot by grouped into precise categories g. Order-routine specification 

h. Performance review 




THE WALL SKEET JOURNAL. 



IN PRACTICE 

Understanding buyer behavior is a 
complicated process, with many 
factors influencing the process. 
Why and what products are pur- 
chased baffles marketers as much 
as understanding why certain prod- 
ucts are not purchased. Ultimately, 
understanding buyer behavior 
influences the marketing mix used 
for a product. 

Marketers must be able to 
answer two critical questions when 
assessing consumer and organiza- 
tional buyer behavior: (1) How do 
buyers make purchase decisions? 
and (2) What factors influence deci- 
sions and in what way? Answering 
these questions correctly impacts 
the success of any product. 

Consumer and organizational 
buyer behavior differ significantly. 
While considerable research about 
consumer purchasing decisions has 
been conducted, minimal research 
has been done about organizational 
buyer behavior. Marketers must 
understand the different factors 
and influences affecting each group 
and the impact of these on pur- 
chase decisions. 

Cisco Systems, Inc., provides 
networking solutions that connect 
computer devices and networks for 
businesses. Check out Cisco's Web 
site at www.cisco.com. Under Solu- 
tions for Your Network, click on 
Overview. A menu will appear to 
the left with information for cus- 
tomers such as Large Enterprises, 
Small and Medium Businesses, and 
Government entities. Click on one 
of those links now to read about 
product offerings for these 
customers. 

The Business Focus section of 
Marketplace provides information 



about various business activities, 
including purchasing. On the Mar- 
ketplace home page, click on Busi- 
ness Focus on the left menu. 

For information about con- 
sumer buying behavior, go to the 
Interactive Journal's Front Section 
and click on Marketplace. Click on 
MarketinglMedia. Look for articles 
in the Advertising section. These 
articles discuss examples of adver- 
tising efforts that various compa- 
nies employ to influence consumer 
buying decisions. Information 
about retail sales can also be found 
in MarketinglMedia. 

DELIVERABLE 

Using the Interactive Journal's 
Business Index feature under Jour- 
nal Atlas on the left menu, select a 
consumer products company fea- 
tured in today's Interactive Journal. 
Visit that company's website and 
search the Interactive Journal for 
information that will help you iden- 
tify the Situational and External 
Influences for customers purchas- 
ing the company's product(s). 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 

1. How can marketers use the 
Internet to influence consumer 
buyer behavior? Organizational 
buyer behavior? 

2. How has business-to-business 
(B2B) commerce affected pur- 
chasing transactions? 

3. What new factors or influences 
do you foresee impacting con- 
sumer buyer behavior? Organi- 
zational buyer behavior? 

4. What ethical considerations (if 
any) do advertisers face when 
they try to influence buyer 
behavior? 



97 



98 CHAPTER 4 UNDERSTANDING BUYER BEHAVIOR 

SUMMARY 



In this chapter, the rudiments of buyer behavior were presented. The chapter is divided into two parts: 
consumer behavior and organizational behavior. In the case of consumer behavior, the discussion began 
with six stages in the consumer decision-making process. These stages include need identification, 
information search and processing, evaluation of alternatives, product/service/outlet selection, pur- 
chase, and postpurchase behavior. 

Following the material was a discussion of the factors that influence this decision-making process. 
The situational influences consist of the complexity, market offerings, and demographics. External 
influences include the culture, social class, reference groups, and the family. Finally, the internal influ- 
ences identified were learning/socialization, motivation, personality, lifestyles, and attitudes. 

The final section of the chapter dealt with issues germane to how organizations make buying 
decisions compared to how consumers make buying decisions. Discussion began with a description 
of the characteristics of organizational buying. The section concluded with a description or the stages 
followed in organizational buying. These stages were problem recognition, general need description, 
product specification, supplier's search, proposal solicitation, supplier selection, order-routine spec- 
ification, and performance review. 



MARKETER'S VOCABULARY 



Market A group of potential buyers with needs and wants and the purchasing power to satisfy them. 

Need A basic deficiency given a particular situation. 

Want Placing certain personal criteria as to how a need should be fulfilled. 

Information search Involves the mental as well as physical activities that consumers must per- 
form in order to make decisions and accomplish desired goals in the marketplace. 

Attitude An opinion we hold toward a person, idea, place, Or thing. 

Cognitive dissonance Negative feelings the consumer has after purchase. 

High-involvement decisions Decisions that are important to the buyer because they are closely 
tied to self-image and have an inherent risk. 

Low-involvement decisions Decisions that are not very important to the buyer because ego is 
not involved and risk is low. 

Culture A large group of people with a similar heritage. 

Social class People grouped together because of similar occupation, wealth, income, education, 
power, and prestige. 

Reference groups Individuals who share common attitudes and behavior. 

Family Iifecycle Predictable stages experienced by families. 

Learning Changes in behavior resulting from previous experiences. 

Socialization The process by which persons acquire the knowledge, skills, and dispositions that 
make them more or less able members of their society. 

Motivation An inner drive or pressure to take action to satisfy a need. 

Personality A term used to summarize all the traits of a person that makes himlher unique. 

Lifestyle A profile of an individual as reflected in their attitudes, interests, and opinions. 



CASE APPLICATION 9 9 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 

1. Discuss several reasons why marketers continue to have a hard time understanding, predicting, 
and explaining consumer behavior. 

2. Based on your understanding of motives, develop some general guidelines or directives for prac- 
ticing marketing. 

3. How can marketers influence a person's motivation to take action? How can they facilitate 
learning? 

4. Define an attitude. Discuss the components of an attitude. What are the implications for 
marketing? 

5. Distinguish between high-involvement and low -involvement decision making. 

6. Present a diagram of the consumer decision process . What is the role of marketing in each stage 
of this process') 

7. What are the differences between the consumer decision-making process and organizational deci- 
sion-making process? 

8. Assume that you are training a salesperson to sell industrial products. Although this salesperson 
has a strong track record, she has been selling consumer products. What would you emphasize 
during training? 

9. Explain how complexity of the product influences the buying decision process. 

10. Why are opinion leaders so important to marketers') Discuss how marketers could use this type 
of individual in prompting a decision. 

PROJECT 

Locate an individual who has purchased a new automobile during the last year. Using the six-step 
decision-making process, ask this person to indicate how he or she accomplished each step. 

CASE APPLICATION 

CUSTOMER SATISFACTION STILL MATTERS 

To many American travelers, airline quality is an oxymoron. Ted J. Kredir, director of hobby sales 
for Dallas-based trading card company, Pinnacle Brands, Inc., complains of frequent flight cancel- 
lations, late arrivals, and lousy food. To the surprise of skeptical passengers, the gripes aren't falling 
on deaf ears. After years of focusing on paring expenses, such major airlines as American, Delta, and 
Continental are stepping up their quality efforts. Cost-cutting "diverted our attention from the nuts 
and bolts of out business," concedes American Airlines Chief Executive Robert L. Crandall. "Our 
customers have noticed. " 

A.merican, which once dubbed itself the "on-time machine;' placed a dismal ninth among 10 
carriers in on-time rankings for the third quarter of 1996. So Crandall told managers at the next meet- 
ing that leading all industry-quality ratings is their top job for 1997. An American spokesperson won't 
provide specifics, but says: "We're talking about a lot of operational things like customer comfort 
onboard airplanes." 

At Delta Air Lines, Inc., customer complaints have nearly doubled since 1994; CEO Ronald 
W. Allen blames the pursuit of lower costs. "In some cases WC did cut too deeply," he says. Trans 
World Airlines, Inc., now in the cellar for on-time and customer complaint rankings by the Transportation 



1 00 CHAPTER 4 UNDERSTANDING BUYER BEHAVIOR 



Department, is getting the message too. After on-time arrivals dropped under 50% during the holi- 
days and cancellations climbed, managers warned workers to get back to basics. 

Underscoring the quality drive is the stunning turnaround at Continental Airlines, Inc., where 
for two years CEO Gordon M. Bethune has hammered away at the theme. Once near the bottom of 
,ransportation rankings, Continental now has one of the best racings for on-time performance, bag- 
gage handling, and customer complaints. And in 1996, they won the prestigious J.D. Power & Asso- 
ciates, Inc., award for the highest customer satisfaction on long-haul flights. Bethune claims to be 
grabbing marketing share among business travelers from American and others. "We've been kicking 
their butts," boasts Bethune. 

Jaded coach passengers, however, arent expecting first-ciass treatment anytime soon. "The prod- 
uct is bad, and it's going to stay that way as near as I can tell," says Ed Perkins, editor of Consumer 
Reports Travel Letters. It's up to the airlines to prove such doubters wrong. 

Questions 

1. What risk do airlines take when all of them have the same goal-improving service quality? 

2. Should the airlines focus on business travelers or consumers? Why? 



REFERENCES 



1. Henry Assael, Consumer Behavior and Markeling Action, 3rd ed., in Advances in Consumer Research, ed. K. B. Monroe, Vol. 8, Ann 
Boston: Kent Publishing, 1987, p. 84. Arbor, Mich., 1981. 

2. James Bettman, An Information Processin.g Theory of Consumer 6. William O. Bearden and Michael G. Etzel, "Reference Group Influ- 
Choice, Reading, Mass: Addison Wesley, 1979. cnce on Product and Brand Choice," Journal of Consume, Research, 

3. Richard E. Petty, John T. Cacioppo, and David Schumann, "Central September] 982, pp. ] 83-194. 

and Peripheral Routes to Advertising Effectiveness: The Moderating 7. C. N. Coffer and M. H. Appley, MOlivation: Theory Research, New 

Role of Involvement," Journal of Con.sumer Research 10, September York: John Wiley & Sons, 1964. 

]983, pp. 135-146. 8. Martha Farnsworth Riche, "Psychographies for the 1990's," Ameri- 

4. L Festinger, A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance, Stanford, Calif.: Stan- can Demographics, July [989, pp. 25-6, 30-2. 

ford University Press, 1957. 9. William A. Dempsey, "Vendor Selection and the Buying Process," 

5. Richard Petty and John T. Cacioppo, "Issue Involvement as a Mod- Industrial Marketing Management 1 , 1978, pp. 257-67. 
erator of the Effects on Attitude Advellising Content and Context," 



CHAPTERS 



EXTERNAL CONSIDERATIONS 
IN MARKETING 



LEARNING OBJECTIVES 



As you read through this chapter, you should develop an understand- 
ing of the external considerations in marketing planning. Specifically, 
yo u sho u Id : 

Understand the importance of analyzing the organization's exter- 
nal environment and the impact that the external environment 
has on strategic marketing planning. 

Realize that marketing o rgan izati o nsofte n work with external 
agencies that perform some of these marketing activities . These 
agencies include distributors, retailers, market research suppli- 
ers, advertising agencies, and materia Issuppliers. 
Appreciate the external factors that have an impact on marketing 
activities, including external agencies, competitors, legal/ethical 
issues, economic/political issues, technology, and social trends. 
Relate these external facto rsio the marketing planning process. 



THE CAR INDUSTRY AND TECHNOLOGY 



The 



EV1 is an electric car built by General Motors, marketed under the Saturn 
brand. The EVI was introduced to California and Arizona in 1996 with an estimated $25 
million marketing campaign. 

In 1997, a clean air mandate went into effect in three states-California, Massa- 
chusetts, and New York. The mandate requires that each year, a certain percentage of 
vehicles sold must be zero-emission vehicles. California has since pushed its deadline to 
the year 2003, but requires that ten percent of all vehicles sold be zero-emission. General 
Motors stayed with the original date and won acclaim for the zero-emission technology. 
General Motors is not the only company with an interest in developing electric-powered 
vehicles. Here are several other eleci.ric projects that are underway: 

Honda EV Plus, introduced in 1997 and marketed to families of four 

Chrysler EPIC 

Nissan Prairie Jay minivan 

Ford Ranger EV 

Chevy S-10 pickups 

Toyota RAV4-EV sport-utility vehicle 



101 



1 02 CHAPTER 5 EXTERNAL CONSIDERATIONS IN MARKETING 



Production of electric vehicles was undertaken in response to voter mandates, a 
factor external to the finn. Now, auto producers are introducing electric vehicles in part 
to learn about customer reactions. And there is still much to learn about electric-powered 
technology. Today, there are concerns about things ^ike range, price, and refueling of 
electric vehicles. This is quite a drastic change from typical customer concerns like car 
phones, cup holders, and other frills associated with gas-powered vehicles. A few other 
facts about General Motors' EVl: 

• It leases for between $399 and $549 monthly. 

• Monthly payments on a typical purchase are around $500. 

• They have limited range (about 120 miles between changes). 

• Recharging takes several hours. 

• They are currently best as a second vehic;e. 

Sources: "OM's Advanced Auto Technologies Showcased at Democratic National Convention:' Financial l\eW,S, August 13, 
2000; Jon Pepper, "California Mandate for Electric Cars Means OM Has a Lot to Explain:' The Detroit News, August 23, 
2000. p. 1; Paul Rogers, "California Air Officials Want AutO Makers to Deliver Electric Cars in Two Years:' San Jose Mercury 
News, September 9, 2000. 



INTRODUCTION 



When marketing organizations plan strategically, the key question is, "Does the strategic 
planning process raise the overall level of the organization's effectiveness, and does it pro- 
vide the new strategic direction that is required for the future?" A good strategic plan must 
help marketing organizations recognize the interrelationships among various forces in the 
business environment. These interrelationships must be accounted for if the organization 
is to be capable of implementing ils vision. 

It is important to recognize that most existing planning processes have an internal 
focus. Internal planning processes ask questions like, "What are our strengths and weak- 
nesses?", "What comparative cost advantages do we have?" and "What product features 
provide us with an advantage?" 

The external planning approach asks these same questions but also attempts to under- 
stand hawall of the elements of the marketplace relate 10 each other. In this chapter, we 
focus on the external environmental facton that have an impact on the organization, espe- 
cially the marketing function. In the chapters that follow, we consider the marketplace and 
its behavior. 

As shown in Figure 5.1, marketing managers are confronted with many environmental 
concerns, including technology: customer; competitor! ethical/legal; and economic, polit- 
ical, demographic, and social trends, All organizations should continuously appraise their 
situation and adjust their strategy to adapt to the environment. 

One technique used by organizations to monitor the environment is known as envi- 
ronmental scanning, which refers to activities directed toward obtaining infonnation about 
events and trends that occur outside the organization and that can influence the organiza- 
tion's decision making. In a sense, such data collection scanning acts as an early warning 
system for the organization. It allows marketers to understand the current state of the envi- 
ronment and to predict trends. A formal but simple strategic infornlation scanning system 
can enhance the effectiveness of the organization's env'ronmental scanning efforts.' An infor- 
mation system (part of marketing research) organizes the scanning effort so that informa- 
tion related to specific situations can be more readily obtained and used. 



EXTERNAL FACTORSTHAT AFFECT PLANNING 1 03 



Situation 
analysis 



Internal 
environment 



External 
environment 



Financial 
resources 



Technical 
resources 



Technology 



-T 



Competitive 
situation 



Human 
resources 



Product 

line 



Competition 



Economic/ 
political 

Ethical/ 
legal 



Social 
trends 



FIGURE 5.1 Environmental factors affecting the organization 



A good strategic plan requires careful monitoring of the marketing organization's exter- 
nal environment. The external environment represents sources of opportunities and threats. 
I f the marketing organization is to align its capabilities and resources with opportunities 
and threats, it must know what those threats are. It is important that marketing organiza- 
tions have a strategy to uncover relevant strategic opportunities and threats early. As threats 
and opportunities appear, marketing organizations should develop strategies to deal with 
them. 

Another problem is that at anyone time, there may appear to be a great many oppor- 
tunities and threats looming. Marketers must be able to prioritize these opportunities and 
threats according to such factors as their relevance to the organization, the cost effective- 
ness of strategies to deal with the threats and opportunities, and the urgency of the threat 
or opportunity. Organizations are inundated with information and must therefore have an 
effective mechanism for sorting out that information which is relevant to the organization. 

Only after the marketing environment is thoroughly understood can an organization 
spot trends and determine whether they represent market opportunities or market threats. 



EXTERNAL FACTORSTHAT AFFECT PLANNING 



There are many marketplace changes occurring that marketers cannot control but affect what 
marketers do. Faced with these environmental uncertainties, successful marketers will be 
those who recognize the changes that are occurring and who make effective adjustments. 
There are a number of external factors that constitute the external environment. Our 
approach is to attempt to present an all-encompassing view of the elements of the external 



1 04 CHAPTER 5 EXTERNAL CONSIDERATIONS IN MARKETING 



environment. Rather, it is to briefly describe each of the components and show how exter- 
nal factors affect marketing strategy. 

External Su prises 

Carol Wolfe and Jane Barnes have been friends for six years, sharing carpool responsibilities, 
a common love of sewing, and a belief that being self-employed would be a dream come true. 
After two years of tinkering, they produced a child carrier that they felt would appeal to devoted 
moms who wanted their baby to be physically attached to the parent in a secure and comfort- 
able manner. They knew they would need lots of help getting this business off the ground, but 
never realized how difficult and complicated it would be to obtain such assistance. 

They contacted the chairman of the marketing department at a local college and were 
told they could be considered as a student project for the capstone marketing course. One 
month later, they were given a preliminary report. The report began by listing the various 
agencies and intermediaries they would need to contact in order to start their business. The 
list included the following: personal attorney, patent attorney, accountant, commercial banker, 
raw materials providers (e.g., denim, thread, staples), distributors (wholesalers and retail- 
ers), advertising agency, marketing research firm, and fulfillment house. Further, they would 
have to understand the capabilities, options, and costs associated with each agency/intermediary. 

Since they lived in a relatively small city (population 185,000), many of these agen- 
cieslintermediaries were no 1 , readily available. A local attorney put them in touch with a 
patent attorney and a marketing research company in a nearby large city. The estimated cost 
of doing the patent search was $5,500, while the cost of preliminary research was $9,300. 
Their combined savings totalled $18,000. Clearly, they were underfunded. A quick call to 
the local bank produced another list of requirements they would have to meet in order to 
qualify for a business loan, including a business plan, apro forma statement, and so forth. 

The initial business plan developed by the student group indicated that there were 
several competitors selling a product very similar to Carol and Jane's baby carrier. Also, 
the sources for denim were limited and required a minimum purchase of 500 bolts of fab- 
ric. Finally, because most retailers selling similar products were already committed to other 
manufacturers, it was unJikely that they would find retail distributors. The expected cost of 
manufacturing and marketing 30,000 units the first year was $1.4 million, with a maximum 
possible profit of $146,000. Carol and Jane gave up on their idea. 

While this scenario is quite depressing, it is not that unusual. It is critical that a busi- 
ness identify and evaluate the various agencies and intermediaries that it must deal with. 
Throughout this book, we will constantly identify these external agencies and attempt to 
assess their influence on a marketing organization. 

Competitors 

As with other external forces , management must also prioritize the importance of the fac- 
tors that affect competition. The relationships between these elements and competition must 
be understood if the organization is to be able to develop and sustain a competitive advantage. 

Competitive analysis focuses on opportunities and threats that may occur because of actual 
or potential competitive changes in strategy. It starts with identifying current and potential com- 
petitors. For example, who are General Motors competitors'' If you named companies like To- 
yota, Ford, Chrysler and Honda, you are right, but you've just begun. Table 5.1 outlines some 
of General Motors' competitors and Table 5.2 does the same with Nintendo's competitors. 

It is essential that the marketer begin this assessment by answering the following ques- 
tion: "What criteria can be used to identify a salient set of competitors?" 



EXTERNAL FACTORS THAT AFFECT PLANNING 



105 



TABLE 5.1 Analysis of General Motors' Competitors 






Transportation 


After-Market 




Autos Other Repairs 




Parts 



Toyota 


Schwinn 


Auto dealers 


Pep-Boys 


Ford 


Delta Airlines 


Sears 


NAPA 


Chrysler 


American Airlines 


K-Mart 




Honda 


Honda motorcycles 


Local repair shops 




Audi 


Mass transit 







TABLE 5.2 Analysis of Nintendo's Competitors 



Video Games 




Entertainment 




Game Suppliers Game Providers 


In-Home 


Out-of-Home 


Hobbies 


Sega TheTilt 

Atari Video game parlor 

Genesis Mazzio's 


Family time 
Parker Brothers 
Blockbuster Video 


PlittTheaters 

The NewYork Mets 

Six Flags 


Hunting, fishing, 
golf, Little League, 
baseball, Girl Scouts 



It is clear fram these two examples that an accurate accounting of competitors is much 
broader than the obvious. If we define our competitors too narrowly, we risk the chance 
that an unidentified competitor will take market share away from us without our knowl- 
edge. For example, General Motors obviously competes against Ford, Chrysler, Toyota, and 
other auto manufacturers. But they also compete against Sears in the repair market, the sub- 
way in large cities, the airlines, and Schwinn, among people for whom bicycle riding is 
popular. Nintendo competes against Sega in the video game market. But they also compete 
against Blockbuster Video, the local gym, board games, the theater, and rock concerts. Com- 
petition focuses on the wants and needs being satisfied, not the product being produced. 
General Motors, then, is competing to satisfy your need for transportation. Nintendo is com- 
peting to satisfy your need for entertainment. 

In addition to identifying a competitor from the perspective of the customer, other 
criteria might be the geographic location of competitors, relative size, history, channels of 
distribution, and common tactics. 

A second question to consider is the following: "What criteria do we need 10 use to 
make sure thai Our competitors are 'colTectly' identified?" One way of answering this ques- 
tion is to track the customer's perceptions of product groupings and substitution. Do they 
change over time? Likewise, tracking expected competitors over time may prove insightful. 

Once competitors are cOlTectly identified, it is helpful to assess them relative to fac- 
tors that drive competition: entry, barg2ining power of buyers and suppliers, existing rival- 
ries, and substitution possibilities. These factors relale to a firm's marketing mix decisions 
and may be used to create a barrier to entry, increase brand awareness, or intensify a fight 
for market share. 

Barriers to entry represent business practices or conditions that make it difficult for 
new or existing firms to enter the market. Cur entrepreneurs Carol and Jane faced several 
barriers to entry. Typically, barriers to entry can be in the form of capital requirements, 
advertising expenditures, product identity, distribution access, or switching costs. Japan has 
been accused of having unofficial cultural-based barrierr> to the Japanese market. 



1 06 CHAPTER 5 EXTERNAL CONSIDERATIONS IN MARKETING 



In industries such as steel, automobiles, ana computers, the power ofbuyers and sup- 
pliers can be very high . Powerful buyers exist when they are few in number, there are low 
switching costs, or the product represents a significant share of the buyer's total costs. This 
is common for large retailers such as Wal-Mart and Home Depot. A supplier gains power 
when the product is critical to the buyer and when it has built up the switching costs. Exam- 
ples include Microsoft and BMW. 

Existing competitors and possible substitutes also influence the dynamics of the com- 
petition. For example, in slow-growth markets, competition is more severe for any possi- 
ble gains in market share. High fixed costs also create competitive pressures for firms to 
fill production capacity. For example, hospitals are increasing their advertising in a battle 
to fill beds, which represents a high fixed cost. 

Legal/Ethical Factors 

Every marketing organization's activities are influenced by ethical and legal factors that 
establish the rules of the game. These laws, agencies, policies, and behavioral norms are 
established to ensure that marketers compete legally and ethically in their efforts to pro- 
vide want and need satisfying products and services. The various legal issues with whiCh 
marketers must be knowledgeable include the following: 

1. Monetary andfiscal policy-Marketing decisions are affected by factors like tax 
legislation, the money supply, and the level of government spendiag. The tendency 
of a Republican Congress to spend on defense materials and not on the environ- 
ment is an example. 

2. Federal legislation-Federal legislation exists to ensure such things as fair com- 
petition, fair pricing practices, and honesty in marketing communications. Anti- 
tobacco legislation affects the tobacco and related industries. 

3. Government/industry relationships-Agriculture, railroads, shipbuilding, and other 
industries are subsidized by government. Tariffs and import quotas imposed by 
government affect certain industries (e.g., automobile). Other industries are reg- 
ulated (or no longer regulated) by government (e.g., rail, trucking, and airlines). 
Deregulating the utilities industry had a tremendous negative effect on the Cali- 
fornia power industry in 2001. 

4. Social legislation-Marketers' activities are affected by broad social legislation 
like the civil rights laws , programs to reduce unemployment, and legislation that 
affects the environment (e.g., water and air pollution). The meat processing indus- 
try has spent billions of dollars trying to comply with water pollution legislation. 

5. State laws-State legislation affects marketers in different ways. For example, util- 
ities in Oregon can spend only V-PIo of their net income on advertising. California 
has enacted legislation to reduce the energy consumption of refrigerators and air 
conditioners. And in New Jersey, nine dairies have paid the state over $2 million 
dollars to settle a price-fixing lawsuit. 

6. Regulatory agencies — State regulatory agencies (e.g., the Attorney General's Office) 
actively pursue marketing violations of the law. But federal agencies like the Fed- 
eral Trade Commission and the Consumer P:'oduct Safety concern themselves with 
all facets of business. 

Literally every facet of business is affected by one or more laws. It would be impos- 
sible to adequately cover them all in the space allotted. However, we will briefly discuss 



EXTERNAL FACTORS THAT AFFECT PLANNING 107 

the three areas receiving the most notice in marketing: product liability, deregulation, and 
consumer protection. 

Product Liability 

The courts are increasingly holding sellers responsible for the safety of their products. The 
courts generally hold that the producer of a product is liable for any product defect that 
causes injury in the course of normal use. Liability can even result if a court or a jury decides 
that a product's design, construction, or operating instructions and safety warnings make 
the product unreasonably dangerous to use. 2 

Two Maryland men decided to dry their hot air balloon in a commercial laundry 
dryer. The dryer exploded, injuring them. They sued the manufacturer and won. 

A two-yea.;-old child being treated for bronchial spasms suffered brain damage 
from a drug overdose. The hospital staff had clearly exceeded the dosage level pre- 
scribed by the drug manufacturer. The child's parents successfully sued the 
manufacturer. 

In Australia, about 20,000 kangaroos are killed or injured by motor vehicles 
each year. Vehicles are equipped with bullbars to limit damage to kangaroos. The 
problem is that the bullbars often confuse computer sensors, causing airbags to 
deploy unnecessarily. To solve the problem, General Motors-Holden's Automotive is 
experimenting with Robo-roo, a crash dummy that is made ill the image of a 60-kg. 
kangaroo. Robo-roo is used to test various bullbars in. an effo(t to find one that pre- 
vents injury to the kangaroos and is often safe with regard to airbags. 3 

While examples such as these are devastating, many feel that product liability law is 
now as it should be-in favor of the injured product user. Consumer advocates like Ralph 
Nader argue that for too long, product liability favored producers at the expense of the prod- 
uct user. They claim that the threat of lawsuits and huge settlements and restitutions force 
companies to make safe products. While a discussion of all aspects of products liability is 
beyond the scope of this text, it is clear that liability has and will continue to have tremen- 
dous impact on consumers and manufacturers alike. And these two groups are not the only 
ones affected. Retailers, franchises, wholesalers, sellers of mass-produced homes, and build- 
ing site developers and engineers are all subject to liability legislation. 

Deregulation 

Deregulation means the relaxation or removal of government controls over industries that 
were thought to be either "natural monopolies," such as telephones, or essential public serv- 
ices like airlines and trucking. When regulated, industries got protection against renegade 
competition. For 40 years, the Civil Aeronaut'CR Board barred the creation of any major 
new airline. And carriers could fly only over routes awarded them by the CAB. 

With time, the bargain grew increasingly bad. Insulated from competition, regulated 
industries had little reason to lower costs. They concentrated on influencing the regulators 
to make favorable decisions. There was an unhealthy tension and costs rose, industries sought 
price increases, and regulators resisted, often depressing industry profits . That, in turn, reduced 
new investment and perpetuated high costs and poor service. 

Industries such as the airlines, banking railroads, communications, and trucking have 
long been subject to government regulation. A marketplace Shockwave hit these industries 
as they were deregulated. Each of these industries saw the birth of many new competitors 
attempting to take advantage of market opportunities uncovered by deregulation. For exam- 
ple, US Airways, Midway, People Express, AirCal, Golden West, Muse Air and Texas Air 
all started after the airline industry was deregulated. Not all of them survived. The resull 



108 CHAPTERS EXTERNAL CONSIDERATIONS IN MARKETING 



was that competition intensified, prices were lowered (sometimes below cost), and many 
once-stable organizations suffered huge financial losses. 

As deregulation unfolded-new competition was permitted, rate regulation was loos- 
ened or abandoned-the vicious cycle began to reverse itself. For example, AT&T had beeD 
slow to adopt fiber-optic cable. In 1985, there were only 136,000 miles of it in AT&T's 
system. Sprint and MCI had more. AT&T responded. By 1994, it had 1.3 million miles of 
fiber cable (slightly more than MCI and Sprint). Airlines, freed of the CAB's routine restric- 
tions, organized "hub and spoke" systems-routing passengers via major transfer points- 
that provided more connections. In 1978, about 14% of all passengers had to change airlines 
to reach their destination; by 1995, this number fell to about 1%.4 

Consumer Protection 

Since the beginning of the twentieth century, there has been a concerted effort to protect 
the consumer. For example, the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (1938) was aimed princi- 
pally at preventing the adulteration or misbranding of the three categories of products. The 
various federal consumer protection laws include more than 30 amendments and separate 
laws relating to food, drugs, and cosmetics, such as the Infant Formula Act (1980) and the 
Nutritional Labeling and Education Act (] 990). Perhaps the most significant period in con- 
sumer protection was the 1960s, with the emergence of consumerism. This was a grass- 
roots movement intended to increase the influence, power, and rights of consumers in dealing 
with the institutions. The Consumer Product Safety Act (1972) established the Consumer 
Product Safety Commission. 

Ethics is generally referred to as the set of moral principles or values that guide behav- 
ior. There is a general recognition that many, if not most, business decisions involve some 
ethical judgement. Consider the following dilemma. An athletic shoe company is consid- 
ering whether to manufacture shoes in a country with a very poor record on human rights. 
The new facility will improve the companys competitive position, but the host government 
will also make a considerable profit, a profit that will be enjoyed by the ruling elite, not by 
the people of the country who will be employed at meager wages. Will the firm support a 
COffilpt government in order to make higher profits? 

Firms hope that a consideration of ethical issues during the decision-making process 
will be helpful in preventing or at least decreasing the frequency of unethical behavior. Hav- 
ing a corporate ethics policy also seems to facilitate the process of recovery after an ethi- 
cal scandal-although firms may wish otherwise, unethical acts do occur and do not often 
go unnoticed. The lack of respect many people feel towards business today, the press's propen- 
sity for investigative teporting, and the willingness of many insiders to blow the whistle on 
unethical corporate behavior increase the likelihood that such behaviors wiil eventually be 
discovered. See Figure 5.2. 

Ethical problems faced by marketing professionals stem from conflicts and dis- 
agreements. They tend to be relationship problems. Each party in a marketing transaction 
brings a set of expectations regarding how the business relationship will exist and how trans- 
actions should be conducted. For example, when you as a consumer wish io purchase some- 
thing from a retailer, you bring the following expectations about the transaction: (1) you 
want to be treated fairly by the salesperson. (2) you want to pay a reasonable price, 
(3) you want the product to be available as advertising says it will and in the indicated con- 
dition, and (4) you want it to perform as promised. UrJortunately, your expectations might 
not be in agreement with those of the retailer. The retail salesperson may not "have time 
for you," or the retailer's notion of a "reasonable" price may be higher than yours, or the 
advertising for the product may be misleading. A summary of ethic issues related to mar- 
keting is shown in Table 5.3 . 



EXTERNAL FACTORS THAT AFFECT PLANNING 



109 



BusinessWeek/Harris Poll 



Survey of 1035 adults conducted Aug. 25-29, 2000, 1009 
adults conducted June 29-July 5, 2000, 1010 adults 
conducted Dec. 9-12, 1999, and 1004 adults on Feb. 23-26, 
1996. Results should be accurate within 3 percentage 
points. Results for 2000 are from June unless otherwise 
noted. 

CORPORATE AMERICA: SOME CREDIT, MORE BLAME 

American business should be given most of the credit for 
the prosperity that has prevailed during most of the 1990s. 

AGREE SOMEWHAT SOMEWHAT DISAGREE NOT SURE 

STRONGLY AGREE DISAGREE STRONGLY NO ANSWER 

2000 26% .42% 19% 10% 2% 

1996 55%* 44%* 



Business has gained too much power over too many 
aspects of American life. 



companies, the HMOs." Do you agree or disagree with 
Gore's sentiments? 



Strongly agree 
Somewhat agree 
Somewhat disagree 

SECTOR BY SECTOR 



39% Strongly disagree 13% 

35% Don't Know/ 
9% No answer 4% 



LOW MARKS FROM CONSUMERS 

How would you rate these industries in serving their 



consumers '. 

ONLY PRETTY 

POOR FAIR 

HMOs 43% 28% 

Toba ceo 

companies 43% 30% 

Oil companies 39% 35% 

Insurance 

companies 32% .41 % 



DON'T KNOWI 
GOOD EXCELLENT NO ANSWER 



15% 

14% 
16% 



3% 

5% 
3% 



11% 

8% 
7% 

3% 





AGREE 


SOMEWHAT 


SOMEWHAT 


DISAGREE 


NOT SURE! 
















STRONGLY 


AGREE 


DISAGREE 


STRONGLY 


NO ANSWER 














2000 (Aug.) 


.40% 


32% 


15% 


9% 


.4% 


43% think HMOs 


: serve their customers POORLY 




2000 (June) 


52% 


30% 


12% 


.4% 


2% 














1996 


71%* 


28%* 




Pharmaceutical 
























companies 


27% 


37% 


26% 


5% 


5% 


In general, what is good for bus 


iness is good for most 


Airlines 


22% 


41 % 


25% 


3% 


9% 


Americans. 












Telephone 














AGREE 
STRONGLY 


SOMEWHAT 
AGREE 


SOMEWHAT 
DISAGREE 


DISAGREE 
STRONGLY 


NOT SURE! 
NO ANSWER 


companies 


20% 


42% 


31% 


6% 


1% 


2000 (Aug) 


14% 


33% 


27% 


22% 


.4% 


News 












2000 (June) 


17% 


35% 


23% 


24% 


1% 


organizations 


18% 


38% 


33% 


6% 


5% 


1996 


32% 


39% 


20% 


8% 


1% 


Hospitals 
Entertainment 


15% 


35% 


38% 


9% 


3% 


How much i 


confidence 


do you h 


ave in those running big 


companies 


14% 


33% 


38% 


9% 


6% 


business? 












Automobile 


















2000 




1999 


companies 


12% 


42% 


37% 


6% 


3% 


Great deal 






19% 




15% 


Financial 












Only some 






58% 




69% 


services firms .. 


. 12% ... 


. 40% . . 


. . 34% . . 


. . 5% . . . 


. 9% 


Hardly any 
Not sure/Nc 


i answer 




17% 

5% 




13% 

3% 


Computer 
companies 


4% 


30% 


40% 


10% 


16% 


Having larg 
developing 


e profits is 
safe, reliat 


more im| 


inrtanttn hin business than 


GOOD PRODUCTS, POOR PRACTICES 






ile, quality products for consumers. 


WHAT CORPORATIONS DO WELL-AND NOT SO WELL 






AGREE 
STRONGLY 


SOMEWHAT 
AGREE 


SOMEWHAT 
DISAGREE 


OISAGREE 
STRONGLY 


NOT SURE 
NO ANSWER 


How would you 


rate large 


U.S. com 


panies on 


each of th 


e 



2G00 (Aug.) 38% 28% 14% 17% 3% 

•Question asked only agree or disagree 

GORE'S BIG SCORE 

At the recent Democratic convention, Vice-President Al Gore 
criticized a wide range of large corporations, including "big 
tobacco, big oil, the big polluters, the pharmaceutical 



Making good products and competing in a global economy 







PRETTY 


ONLY 




DONT KNOW! 




EXCELLENT 


GOOD 


FAIR 


POOR 


NO ANSWER 


2000 


18% 


50% 


26% 


5% 


1% 


1996 


14% 


.44% 


33% 


9% 


* 



FIGURE 5.2 How business rates: by the numbers 



110 



CHAPTER 5 EXTERNAL CONSIDERATIONS IN MARKETING 



While ethics deal with the relationship between buyer and seller, there are also instances 
when the activities of marketing influence society as a whole. For example when you pur- 
chase a new refrigerator, there is a need to discard your old refrigerator. Thrown in a trash 
dump, the old refrigerator may pose a safety risk, or contaminate the soil., and certainly 
will contaminate the aesthetics of the countryside, thus requiring society to bear part of the 
cost of your purchase. This example illustrates toe issue of social responsibility, the idea 
that organizations are part of a larger society and are accountable to society for their actions. 
The well-being of society at large should also be recognized in an organization's market- 
ing decisions. In fact, some marketing experts stress the societal marketing concept, the 
view [hat an organization should discover and satisfy the needs of its consumers in a way 
that also provides for society's well-being. A definition for social marketing is provided by 
Alan Andreasen: 

Social marketing is the adaptation of commercial marketing technologies to programs 
designed to influence the voluntary behavior of target audiences to improve their per- 
sonal welfare and that of the society of which they are a part. 5 

There is little doubt that the importance of social marketing is growing, and that for many 
marketers, it will become part of their competitive advantage. 

Economic/Political Issues 

Various economic forces influence an organization's ability to compete and consumer's will- 
ingness and ability to buy products and services. The state of the economy is always chang- 
ing. Interest rates rise and fall. Inflation increases and decreases. Consumers' ability and 
willingness to buy changes. The economy goes through fluctuations. Two aspects of the 
economy are consumer's buying power and the business cycle. 



TABLE 5.3 Ethical Issues in Marketing 



Issue 



Percent of 

Marketing 

Professionals 

Responding 



Bribery 

Fai rness 

Honesty 
Price 

Product 

Personnel 
Confidentiality 
Advertising 
Manipulation of Data 
Purchasing 



Gifts from outside vendors, payment of questionable commissions, "money 

under the table" 15% 

Unfairly placing company interests over family obligations, taking credit for the work 

of others, inducing customers to use services not needed, manipulation of others 14% 

Lying to customers to obtain orders, misrepresenting services and capabilities 12% 

Differential pricing, charging higher prices than firms with similar products while 

claiming superiority, meeting competitive prices 12% 

Product safety, product and brand infringement, exaggerated performance claims, 

products that do not benefit consumers 11% 

Firing, hiring, employee evaluation 10% 

Temptations to use or obtain classified, secret, or competitive information 5% 

Crossing the line between exaggeration and misrepresentation, misleading customers 4% 

Falsifying figures or misusing statistics or information, distortion 4% 

Reciprocity in the selection of suppliers 3% 



Marketing professionals were asked to describe the most difficult ethical issue they face. 

Source: Lawrence B. Chonko and Shelby D. Hunt, "Ethics and Marketing Management: An Empirical Examination:' Journal of Business 
Research, Vol. 13, 1985, pp. 339-359. 



EXTERNAL FACTORS THAT AFFECT PLANNING 111 

Consumer Buying Power 

A consumer's buying power represents hislher ability to make purchases. The economy affects 
buying power. For example, if prices decline, consumers have greater buying power. If the 
value of the dollar increases relative to foreign currency, consumers have greater buying 
power. When inflation occurs, consumers have less buying power. A list of several aspects 
of consumer buying power is presented next. Each can be measured relative to a marketer's 
external environment. 

• Buying power: A consumer's ability to make purchases. 

• Income: The amount of money an individual receives from wages, rents, invest- 
ments, pensions, and/or subsidies. 

• Disposable income: The income available for spending after taxes have been paid. 

• Discretionary income: Disposable income available for spending or saving after basic 
necessities (e.g., food, housing, clothing) have been purchased. 

• Credit: An individual's ability to buy something now and pay for it later. 

• Wealth: The accumulation of past income and other assets including savings accounts, 
jewelry, investments, real estate, and the :ike. 

• Willingness to spend: An individual's choice of how much disposable income to 
spend and what to spend it on . 

o Consumer spending patterns: Amount of money spent on certain kinds of products 
and services each year. 

• Comprehensive spending patterns: The amount of income individuals allocate to 
expenditures for classes of products and services. 

• Product spending patterns: The amount of income spent for specific products in a 
product class. 

Several of these concepts are illustrated in the Newsline that follows. 



NEWSLINE: EVERYONE SEEMS TO HAVE MONEY 

It's been called mystery prosperity. The nation's economy is growing 
at a rate not seen since the 1960s, unemployment and inflation are 
the lowest in decades, and the stock market is setting records with 
regularity. Some economists explain our good fortune by claiming a 
new economy is at work, one driven by deficit reduction, low interest 
rates, and technological advances. Others point to things like the 
Asian contagion and the inevitable limits of the bull market, and won- 
der how long this can last (in fact it ended in 2000). 

But despite market jitters, at least we can take comfort in knowing 
that the economy may be more stable than many fear, if only because 
consumer spending-which accounts for two-thirds of the nation's 
economic output- has been considerably muted in the past decade. 
Talk about unconventional wisdom. How can this be? Hasn't the 
media been trumpeting America's runaway spending spree? 

It's true that consumer spending has been growing, but only at the 
aggregate level: the population is grOwing, the number of households 
is increasing, and the baby-boom generation-the youngest of which 
is now 35-has entered its peak spending years. But a close look at 
trends in spending by individual households tells a different story. 



112 CHAPTERS EXTERNAL CONSIDERATIONS IN MARKETING 



Despite low unemployment levels and rising wages, the average Amer- 
ican household's spending has been cautious, if not downright 
miserly, in the last decade. The average household spent 13% less on 
food away from home in 1997 than in 1987, after adjusting for infla- 
tion. It spent 25% less on major appliances; 24% less on alcoholic 
beverages; 18% less on newspapers, books, and magazines; and 15% 
less on clothing. 

The most important predictor of spending is lifecycle stage. Typi- 
cally, households headed by twenty-somethings spend less than aver- 
age on most products and services because their households are 
small and their incomes are low. Spending hits a maximum in middle 
age as family size increases and incomes peak, then falls again in 
older age as household size and income decline. 

These stages, combined with the baby booms and busts of past 
decades, have made consumer marketing a complex endeavor. Add a 
fundamental change in the lifecycle pattern of spending, and mar- 
keters are discovering that doing business today is a 101. like building 
a house in an earthquake zone. 

Sources: "The New Consumer Paradigm," American Demographics. April 1999, 
pp. 50-58; Edwin S. Rubenstein, "Inequality," Forbes. January 2000, pp. 
32-33; "Cutting a Pie," Forbes, September 4. 2000, p. 86; Susan Jacoby, 
"Money," Modern Maturity, July-August 2000, pp. 36-41. 



The Business Cycle 

Fluctuations in our economy follow a general pattern known as the business cycle. The fluc- 
tuations in economic conditions affect supply and demand, consumer buying power, con- 
sumer willingness to spend, and the intensity of competitive behavior. The four stages in 
the business cycle are prosperity, recession, depression, and recovery. 

Prosperity Prosperity represents a period of time during which the economy is grow- 
ing. Unemployment is low. consumers' buying power is high, and the demand for products 
is strong. During prosperity, consumer disposable incomes are high and they try to improve 
their quality of life by purchasing products and services that are high in quality and price. 
The U.S. economy was in a period of prosperity from 1991 to 2000. For marketers; oppor- 
tunities were plentiful during prosperity, and they attempted to expand prodJct lines to take 
advantage of consumers' increased willingness to buy. 

Recession Recession is characterized by a decrease in the rate of growth of the econ- 
omy. Unemployment rises and consumer buying power declines. Recession tends to occur after 
periods of prosperity and inflation. During a recession, consumers' spending power is low, as 
they are busy paying off debts incurred through credit purchases during more prosperous time:;. 
During recessions, marketing opportunities a r e reduced. Because of reduced buying power, con- 
sumers become more cautions, seeking products that are more basic and functional. 

Depression Depression represents the most serious economic downturn. Unem- 
ployment increases, buying power decreases , and ail other economic indicators move down- 



EXTERNAL FACTORSTHAT AFFECT PLANNING 113 

ward. Consequently, consumers are unable or reluctant to purchase products, particularly 
big-ticket items. Also, consumers tend to delay replacement purchases. Although many mar- 
keters fail during this period, insightful marketers can gain market share. 

Recovery Recovery is a complicated economic pattern, in that some economic indi- 
cators increase while others may stay low or even decrease. Much of what happens during 
a recovery may be a result of intangibles, such as consumer confidence or the perception 
of businesses that things will get better. Tentative marketers take serious risks. Premature 
marketers may face dire consequences. 

For marketers, an important task is to attempt to determine how quickly the econ- 
omy will move into a situation of prosperity. Improper forecasting can lead some firms to 
overextend themselves , as consumers may be slow to change purchase habits they have been 
accustomed to in the more difficult economic times. 

The economy is cyclical in nature. We know that the cycles will occur. We just can- 
not predict exactly when, or how severe the cycles will be. Assumptions must be made about 
money, people, and resources. For example, many organizations become less aggressive 
when they believe the economy is not going to grow. I f they are right, they may do well. 
But if they are wrong, those organizations that are more aggressive can perform very well- 
often at the expense of the conservative organizations. Assumptions must also be made about 
such economic factors as interest rates, inflation, the nature and size of the workforce, and 
the availability of resources such as energy and raw materials. 

Technology 

Is the car of the future the electric car? They're called zero-emission vehicles by their advo- 
cates, but they do not have zero emissions according to some experts. While an electric car 
does not emit exhaust, the technology required to charge their batteries does, according to 
ihe Environmental Protection Agency. 6 Critics argue that the more electric cars that are driven, 
the more pollution from smokestacks at the plants that provide the electric power. You are 
familiar with the complaints about gas-driven automobiles, but, if the electric-powered auto 
is no different in terms of its impact on the environment, than there could be some inter- 
esting battles ahead between proponents of the electric car and environmental groups. In 
fact, some auto industry executives felt tha[ the EPA report did not go far enough in dis- 
crediting the electric car. 

Technology is the knowledge of how to accomplish tasks and goals. Technology affects 
marketers in several ways. First, aggressively advancing technology is spawning new prod- 
ucts and processes at an accelerating rate that threatens almost every existing product. Sec- 
ond, competition continues to intensify from broad and new organizations and many substitute 
technologies compete with established products. Third, product innovations that result in 
superior performance or cost advantages are the best means of protecting or building mar- 
ket position without sacrificing profit margins. This is especially true in today's world, when 
many markets are experiencing flat or slow growth and excess capacity is commonplace. 

History provides many examples of companies that have lost their competitive 
advantage- and perhaps even their entire business-because a competitor came into the 
market with a product that had superior cost advantage or performance characteristics. These 
examples are not limited to small or weak companies; even industrial giants like IBM, Gen- 
eral Electric, and AT&T have seen certain parts of their markets eroded by competition that 
surprised them with a distinctly superior product. IBM. despite its dominant position in the 



114 



CHAPTER 5 EXTERNAL CONSIDERATIONS IN MARKETING 



computer market, lost position in the late 1970s to several smaller companies that were first 
to develop powerful minicomputers to replace the larger mainframe computers that were 
the cornerstone of IBM's business. 

All organizations must make assumptions about the future in technology and its impact 
on their business activities. The results of technology cannot be ignored. For example, the 
Japanese promote the use of electronic circuits and have used them almost exclusively in 
their controls. However, U.S .-based organizations have been slower to change and many 
have continued to use electromechanical controls in their products. 

Everyone enjoys thinking about the future and the kinds of technology that will evolve. 
Let's fast- forward a few years to see what opportuniLes technology will open up for marketers: 

• How about ads that are targeted not [o a demographic or psychographic group, but 
to you specifically- ads that know what you need and what you want? 

• How about a house of smart appliances with Internet connections-refrigerators 
that tell you when you're running out of milk and dryers that know to call the repair- 
man when they break? 

• How about a cell phone that knows where you are and can direct you to a great 
new Korean restaurant, or a Palm handheld device that delivers streaming video 
right to your hand? 

• How about a TV that airs a pizza ad you can order from at the click of a button, 
with total integration between a channel and its Web site? 



NOT IN LOVE WITH ONLINE-IMAGINE! 



There are people who are Net-free, and they plan to stay that 
way. This seems to be especially true with many of the rich 
and famous. Mark McCormack, agent toTiger Woods and ten- 
nis phenoms Venus and Serena Williams, surrounds himself 
with tech-savvy folks, but has never used a computer him- 
self. Actress Daryl Hannah has a computer, but hasn ' t turned 
it on in three years. Author Harlan Ellison, who churns out 
novels and short stories by typing with two fingers on a man- 
ual typewriter, is simply turned off by the Internet. "It's a mas- 
sive waste of time," he says. "Does Skippy peanut butter really 
need a Web site?" 

Lest you think these are the attitudes of the slightly 
demented, a report conducted by Pew Internet and American 
Life Project indicate that half of U.S. adults are not online — 
and the majority of those non-users are unlikely to hit the Net 
any time soon: 

• 57% have little or no interest in getting online. 

• More than one in ten adults who are not online tried the 
Net before disconnection. 

• More than 14% of Americans have computers but aren't 
online. 



The results seem to contradict predictions that Internet growth 
will continue to boom in coming years. "It may take another 
generation," says Lee Rainie, director of the Pew Project, 
"before the Net becomes as ubiquitous and essential as the 
telephone and television are today." 

To study the 94 million Americans who are not online, 
interviewers questioned 1,158 non-Internet and noncomputer 
users in depth. Findings included the following: 

• 32%, or 31 million Americans, said they "definitely will 
not" go online. 

• 25% say they "probably will not" venture online. 

• 29% "probably will" get Internet access. 

• 12% say they "definitely will" get Internet access. 

Those surveyed by Pew said their primary reasons for shun- 
ning the Internet are fear and lack of interest. More than half 
of those not online believe that the Internet is a dangerous thing 
and that they are not missing anything by staying away. 

Sources: Karen Thomas, "Not Everyone's E-Namored With the 
Net," USA Today, September 25, 2000, p. 3D; Dana Blankenhorn, 
"Hype Blasters," Advertising Age , June 9, 2000, pp. 58-62. 



EXTERNAL FACTORS THAT AFFECT PLANNING 115 

• How about underwear that knows your glucose level is rising and automatically injects 
you with insulin or clothing that senses a heart attack coming and tells you to take 
a pill? 

All these miracles are possible in the amazing world of tomorrow. These are not technologies 
in a lab, but working prototypes, many just abOut to hit the market. The potential for mar- 
keters in just five years makes today's Web offerings look like a warmup act. While these 
services will rely on the Internet to communicate between newfangled gadgets and more 
intelligent servers, most of the services won't be based on HTML, for practical reasons. 
For example, you can't effectively run a Web browser on a cell phone screen, and you don't 
want one inside your shirt. 

The pitfalls for marketers are also obvious. While today's Web is open, each of these 
new technologies has a potential gatekeeper-cell phone operators, cable companies, appli- 
ance makers, and, as noted in the Integrated Marketing box, consumers who are not enthralled 
with the computer. 

Social Trends 

The social environment includes all factors and trends related to groups of people, includ- 
ing their number, characteristics, behavior, and growth projections. Since consumer mar- 
kets have specific needs and problems, changes in the social environment can affect markets 
differently. Trends in the social environment might increase the size of some markets, decrease 
the size of others, or even help to create new markets. We discuss here two important com- 
ponents of the social environment: the demographic environment and the cultural environment. 

Demographic Changes 

Whereas beliefs, values, and customs describe the characteristics of the culture and sub- 
culture, demographics describe the observable characteristics of individuals living in the 
culture. Demographics include our physical traits, such as gender, race, age, and height; 
our economic traits, such as income, savings, and net worth; our occupation-related traits, 
including education; our location-related traits ; and our family-related traits, such as mar- 
ital status and number and age of children. Demographic trait compositions are constantly 
changing, and no American, Japanese, or Brazilian is "typical" anymore. There is no aver- 
age family, no ordinary worker, no everyday wage and no traditional middle class. 

Still, marketing managers must understand consumers intimately. Often, the best they 
can do is take a snapshot and try to understand what is happening in our culture in the early 
years of this century. As we see next, some trends are old; others are new. For instance, the 
aging of the population has been going on for several decades, but births and birth rates in 
recent years have been much higher than expected. Immigration is also greater than pre- 
dicted, and so is the backlash against it. Interstate migration to the south and west are old 
trends. What is new is heavier movement from the Northeast than from the mid- West and 
rapid growth in the mountain states . Next, we examine nine demographic changes and how 
they affect marketmg. 

1. Households are growing more slowly and getting older. About half of all house- 
holds are aged 45 and older and growing at an annual rate of 1% compared with 
nearly 2% in the 1980s. Marketing communicators must plan for a greater num- 
ber of middle-aged households, consumers who are experienced and have a bet- 
ter understanding of price and value. These consumers should have an interest in 
high-quality household goods and in-home health care. 



116 CHAPTERS EXTERNAL CONSIDERATIONS IN MARKETING 



2. The demise of the traditional family. Married couples are a bare majority of U.S. 
households. Only one-third of households have children under 18 , and nearly one- 
foutth of households are people who live alone. However, married couples dom- 
inate the affluent market as the vast majority of very high-income households are 
malTied couples. The long-term trend of high growth in nontraditional types of 
households and lack of growth among marriec; couples can only mear. further seg- 
mentation of an already segmented marketplace. 

A phenomenon that speaks to the change in the traditional farrmy structure 
is known as the "sandwich generation," These are a growing group of adults who 
are caring for agirg parents while raising their own children, According to a study 
from the National Alliance for Caregiving and the American Association of Retired 
Persons, there are more than 9 million Americans in this situation, 40% of them 
between 35 and 49. The stress of belonging to the sandwich generation is taking 
a toll countrywide. "All of a sudden you're struggling with this huge balancing 
act," says 3eth Willogen McLeod, author of Caregiving: The Spiritual Journey 
of Love, Loss, and Renewal. "How do you fulfill all your roles') How do you bal- 
ance your marriage, your children, your work-and elder care?" 

3. The continued increase in education. Most adults in the United States still have 
not completed college (approximately 67%), but that number continues to decline. 
More and more people have attended some college or have an associate or tech- 
nical degree. More skilled worKers mean more knowledgeable and sophisticated 
consumers who expect more information about product attributes and benefits before 
making a purchase. 

4. Nonphysicaljobs keep growing. Jobs that don't require physical strength keep grow- 
ing in number. Virtually all job growth during the next ten years will take place 
among service providers, especially in health care and social services, Because 
providing services require:; little investment compared with producing consumer 
goods, we can expect continued high growth in small businesses, sole proprie- 
torships, and other entrepreneurial activities, Also, the extremely high cost of 
employee benefits suggests that the use of temporary workers and independent 
contractors will continue to grow, Marketing managers must assess whether con- 
sumers who do not ilave corporate benefits wiP become more risk-averse because 
they lack the safety net of company-provided pension plans and medical insur- 
ance, If so, consumers may seek money-back guarantees or other product features 
that reduce risk. Marketing managers must also see whether people who work for 
themselves or for small firms are more fme-conscious, 

5. Growingfaster than expected, About 272 million people live in the United States. 
This is an increase of 18 million since 1990, and most of the growth has resulted 
from an unforeseen boom in births. The United States had about 2004 million births 
between January 1990 and December 1994. This was more than in any five-year 
period since the last five years of the legendary baby boom (1960 to 1964), and 
6% more than in the late 1980s. The United States also experienced the highest 
five-year immigration total (4.6 million) since the turn of the century, an increase 
of 31 % over the previous five years. The annual influx of nearly 1 million new 
residents has led to an increasingly diverse consumer marketplace, particularly 
among young people. 

6. The growth of minorities, Although white non-Hispanics have been the biggest 
contributors to the U. S, population growth in the 1990s, Hispanics have been a 



EXTERNAL FACTORS THAT AFFECT PLANNING 117 

close second. The number of Hispanics in the United States increased from 22 
million in 1990 to 35 million in 2000. That number is nearly twice as many new 
residents as were added by African- Americans and Asians. If each minority seg- 
ment keeps growing at current rates, Hispanics will outnumber African- 
Americans in ttn years. This trend will be particularly important for marketing 
communicators that target certain regions, because Hispanics and Asians are more 
geographically concentrated than African-Americans. 

7. Baby boomers become middle-aged. More than half of Americans are aged 35 or 
older, aid the oldest baby boomers are now aged 55 . The largest ten-year age group, 
people aged 41-50, has been growing as it absorbs the younger half of the baby- 
boom generation. But the number of people in this segment reached a peak in 2000 
and then started to decline. The fastest-growing age group is middle-aged people 
aged 45-54-the age at which income and spending peak. Middle-aged people 
are also the least likely of all age groups to change their residence. This combi- 
naiion of high growth, high income, and low mobility will provide considerable 
lift to discretionary spending, particularly in the categories of home furnishings, 
education, and insurance. 

8. People are moving south. More than half (54%) of U.S. residents live in the ten 
largest states, and more than half of U.S. population growth between 1990 and 
1 999 occurred in these ten states. New York had the largest population of all states 
in 1950, but in the 1990s, fast-growing Texas pushed the barely growing New York 
to number three. One reason for the explosive growth in the southern states is the 
influx of people from other countries. More than half of the four million immi- 
grants that located in the United States between 1990 and 1995 moved to Cali- 
fornia, Texas, or Florida. 

9. The middle class gets hammered. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the share 
of aggregate household income earned by the middle 60% of households has shrunk 
from 52% in 1973 to 49% 25 years later. Meanwhile, the share of such income 
earned by the top 20% (average income $98,600) increased from 44% to 48%. In 
other words, the total purchasing power of the top 20% of U.S. households now 
equals that of the middle 60%.7 

Demographic Groupings 

In addition to understanding general demographic trends, marketing communicators must 
also recognize demographic groupings that may turn out to be market segments because 
of their enormous size, similar socioeconomic characteristics, or shared values. We exam- 
ine three examples of demographic groupings by age that have or will become dominant 
market segments: baby boomers, Generation X, and the baby boomlet. 

The 3aby Boom The baby boom occurred from 1946 through 1964. :Curing this 
19-year time frame. 76.4 million babies were born in the United States. Today, approxi- 
mately 70 million of these baby boomers are still alive. They represent about one-fourth of 
the total population. Because of their numbers and buying power, baby boomers have and 
will continue to influence the marketing mix for the services and products businesses offer 
and how these services and products are offered. For example, the majority of baby boomer 
women work fuli-time and view theirjob as a career. This trend has implications for child- 
care, fashion, automobiles, travel, and fast-food marketing. Health concerns will also grow 
as baby boomers age. 



118 CHAPTER 5 EXTERNAL CONSIDERATIONS IN MARKETING 



Generation X Generation X, also known as the "baby busters" or the "shadow gen- 
eration," is the group of people born from 1969 to 1980. This group has been labeled with 
a "slacker" stereotype. Imagine 45 miilion humans that are characterized as culturally illit- 
erate, apathetic, and directionless. From a marketers' perspective, they have a total dispos- 
able income of 3325 billion. In tune to the newest rage, Xers-highly steeped in a culture 
of sound bytes- seem to know instinctively what they want. And, more importantly, what 
they don't want. 8 

Unfortunately, the more marketers learn about this group, the less it appears to be a 
market segment. For example, Xers' lifestyles range from the 10 million who are full-time 
college and postgraduate students to the 15 million who are married. They are also the most 
radically diverse generation in history Yet their opinions about life in the United States mir- 
ror those of the general population. For instance, 52% of Xers believe that "quality of life" 
is good compared with 53% of the entire population, and 64% of Xers are more "stressed 
about money this year," compared to 58% of the general population. 

Given the diversity of Generation X, what are the possibilities that an integrated mar- 
keting strategy can be targeted to this group? The key will be finding subsegments within 
this 45-million-person group. For example, level of education might be a point of distinc- 
tion. Those in college or with a college degree are likely to be computer-literate and can 
be reached by online media. Their optimism and general concern for a simpler life sug- 
gests that noncondescending marketing messages through public relations or cause-related 
activities would prove effective. 

The Baby Boomlet Just like the baby boomers, the group of 72 million children 
of the baby boomers, called the "baby boomlet" or the "echo boom," is creating new waves 
of change. This group spans 1975 to the present. In 1995, the boomlet had 72 million peo- 
ple under age 19. It is 60% larger than the baby boom. Even if 1995 is the final year for 
boomlet births, this generation will grow through immigration for several more decades. 
By 2015, the baby boomlet will again outnumber the boom. 

The baby boomlets will acquire their own attitudes, often shaped by new technology 
and glObal changes. Global conversations on the Intenet will change their outlook on the 
world. AIDS will change their attitudes toward relationship, marriage, and family. Real- 
time information and the customization of the information will produce a very discerning 
consumer. F;nally, their attitude will also be shaped by defining events . For instance, it will 
be a generation that expects terrorists acts, such as the Oklahoma City and the 1996 Olympics 
bombings. Memorable events will have a lasting effect on their outlook. 

Cultures and Subcultures 

All of us are part of a cultural fabric that affects our behavior, including our behavior as 
consumers. Culture is the sum of learned beliefs, values, and customs that regulate the behav- 
ior of members of a particular society. Through our culture, we are taught how to adjust to 
the environmental, biological, psychological, and historical parts of our environment. 

Beliefs and values are guides of behavior, and customs are acceptable ways of behav- 
ing. A belief is an opinion tnat reflects a person's particular knowledge and assessment of 
("I believe that . . ."). Values are general statements that guide behavior and influence beliefs 
and attitudes ("Honesty is the best policy"). A value system helps people choose between 
alternatives in everyday life. Customs are overt modes of behavior that constitute cultur- 
ally approved ways of behaving in specific situations. Customs vary among countries, regions, 
and even families. In Arab societies, for instance, usury (payment of interest) is prohibited, 
so special Islamic banks exist that provide three types of accounts: non-profit accounts, profit- 



EXTERNAL FACTORS THAT AFFECT PLANNING 119 

sharing deposit accounts, and social service funds. A U.S. custom is to eat turkey on Thanks- 
giving Day. However, the exact Thanksgiving Day menu may depend on family customs. 

Dominant cultural values are referred to as core values; they tend to affect and reflect 
the core character of a particular society. For example, if a culture does not value efficiency 
but does value a sense of belonging and neighborliness, few people in the culture will want 
to use automatic teller machines. What do Americans value? Clearly, a catchall phrase such 
as the "Protestant work ethic" no longer capt'Jres the whole value system. 

Core values are slow and difficult to change. Consequently, marketing communica- 
tion strategies must accurately portray and reflect these values. 

Secondary values also exist in any culture. Secondary values are less permanent val- 
ues that can sometimes be influenced by marketing communications. In addition, second- 
ary values are often shared by some people but not others. These values serve as a basis 
for subcultures. 

A natural evolution that occurs in any culture is the emergence of subcultures. Core 
values are held by virtually an entire culture, whereas secondary values are not. A subcul- 
ture is a group of people who share a set of secondary values. Examples include Genera- 
tion X and environmentally concerned people. Many factors can place an individual in one 
or several subcultures. Five of the most important factors that create subcultures are: 

o Material culture. People with similar income may create a subculture. The poor, 
the affluent, and the white-collar middle class are examples of material subcultures. 

o Social institutions Those who participate in a social institution may form a sub- 
culture. Examples include participation in marriage, parenthood, a retirement com- 
munity, the army, and so on. 

o Belief systems. People with shared beliefs may create a subculture, such as shared 
beliefs in religion or politics. For example, traditional Amish do not use several types 
of products, including electricity and automobiles . A whole set of factors has also 
been correlated with whether a person is a uemocrat, Republican, Independent, Lib- 
ertarian, or Socialist. 

o Aesthetics. Artistic people often form a subculture of their own associated with their 
common interests, including art, music, dance, drama, and folklore. 

o Language. People with similar dialects, accents, and vocabulary can form a sub- 
culture. Southerners and northerners are two traditional categories. 



1. Environmental scanning refers to activities directed c. Legal and ethical factors 
toward obtaining information about events and trends that d. Economic and political issues 
occur outside the organization and that can influence the e. Technology 
organization's decision making. f. Social trends 

2. The following external factors affect planning: 

a. External agencies 

b. Competitors 



1 20 CHAPTER 5 EXTERNAL CONSIDERATIONS IN MARKETING 



Understanding Other Cultures Around the World 

Adjusting to cultural differences is perhaps the most difficult task facing marketing com- 
municators who operate in other countries. Before entering a foreign market, a company 
must decide to what extent it is willing to customize its marketing efforts to accommodate 
each foreign market. Naturally, the more the company standardizes its effort, the less trou- 
ble it incurs and the greater ;he assumed profitability. But is some customization inevitable? 
More is said about this in a later chapter 

Forecasts of the Future 

There are literally hundreds of companies and forecasters who claim to have a handle on 
the future. One that has an excellent track record is Roper Starch, a research firm that has 
been looking at trends for over 50 years. The 2000 Roper Report identified four concepts 
that help marketers understand Americans in the new millennium: 9 

1. "High Pace/High Peace: Americans' high-speed lifestyles create new goals and 
needs ": Silicon Valley marketers often talk about a phenomenon called "high 
tech-high touch"; the more technology becomes part of people's lives (tech), the 
more the need for personal interaction (touch) . We think a similar, possibly more 
powerful phenomenon, is unfolding toaay in today's frenetic, high-speed world 
of drive for success, "Internet time," "24/7" business, and multitasked lifestyles. 
As the pace of life is picking up (high pace), there is growing desire/demand for 
peace. The shift to "High PacelHigh Peace" is evident in the marketplace. Increas- 
ingly, brands seem to be "high-pace" (efficiency-oriented, intense brands like the 
Internet broker E- Trade; personalities like Microsoft chief and bestselling author 
Bill Gates) or "high-peace" (relaxing, spa-pace brallds like Banana Republic, 
Canyon Ranch; personalities like spiritual leader and bestselling author the Dalai 
Lama. The shift is reflected in Roper data as well). Americans are working harder 
than ever to get ahead. Work is spilling into all corners of life: a record 39% of 
Americans say they often spend leisure time on work, a three-fold increase from 
the beginning of the decade. New technologies are making it possible to be ever 
more productive. Americans generally recognize that hard work is the price for 
getting ahead. At the same time, there is a growing yearning for peace. Most agree 
thai the best leisure time is the time alone. But declining numbers are getting such 
time to rest, relax, and renew. More, instead, are feeling stressed ou:.. This ten- 
sion oetween high pace and high peace shows no sign that it will go away. At the 
same time, data suggest that there are opportunities for marketers to become a 
bridge to get people to both their high pace and high peace goals. 

2. "Kinnections: The movement to connection in technology, relationships, and 
brands ":The increasing pace of life is not the only characteristic of America since 
the turn of the new century. Empowered by new technology, the strong economy, 
and a growing command of self-reliance and other skills, Americans have begun 
to reach out and take the next siep to extend their sense of connection, in a whole 
host of areas-from communications and computing to attitudes towards family 
ano community--connections are up. These connections are different from the 
past. They can be fast changing and dynamic (kinetic). And they appear to be part 
of a desire for a greater sense of association (kinship). The movement to connections, 
thus, is actually a move toward "kinnections." The results are reflected in the data. 
Communications technologies are taking off. This is most evident in the explo- 
sive growth of cellular communications. But it is also apparent in the computer 



FXTERNAL FACTORS THAT AFFECT PLANNING 121 

industry, where increasing interest in using computers to connect (e-mail, the Web) 
is driving interest. Many Americans say that these technologies are improving the 
quality of their connections, making it easier to stay in touch with friends and fam- 
ily, and, overall, "making life better." The growth in connections is reflected in 
personal relationships as well: Americans are feeling better about the family and 
more connected to their communities. Indeed, satisfaction with many aspects of 
community is at record levels. Many are pursuing spiritual connections. And this 
sense of connection is apparent in the marketplace as well in cause-related mar- 
keting and a greater desire for brands to go beyond the basics like quality and value 
(which are now expected) to connect in new ways with consumers. 

3. "Diversity/Destiny": Diversity is destiny for America. And not just in some far- 
off future. The U.S. increasingly is "the world's nation": our foreign-born popu- 
lation has almost tripled in the past thirty years. African- Americans, Hispanics, 
and other minorities make up the majOUty of the nation's population growth in 
the past decade-and will account for an even larger proportion of the nation's 
growth in the decade to come. The result is creating new, distinctive demographic 
segments that must be understood, it is also changing society. America is becom- 
ing multicultural. Americans are much more appreciative of ethnic customs and 
traditions compared to two decades ago. Where past generations may have defined 
the American character in terms of pioneer heritage, Americans today see strength 
in our status as "a melting pot." Indeed, being a melting pot is now seen as a core 
source of America's greatness, almost equal to the work ethic, the free enterprise 
system the Constitution and system of government, and the nation's natural splen- 
dor. Multiculturalism defines the nation 's tastes in areas from food to popular music. 
Roper analysis shows that Americans share many basic values and concerns across 
racial and ethnic groups. At the same time, the data suggest that there continue 
to be many distinction;; as well. To succeed in this year of diversity /destiny, mar- 
keters need io know both sides. 

4. "Marketing by life stage ": Marketers have traditionally relied on standard demo- 
graphics to understand and predict consumer behavior. Our research shows, how- 
ever, that life stage can be a more powerful predictor of consumer attitudes and 
behavior than traditional demographic analysis. For example, a 49-year-old woman 
starting a second marriage and second career may have more in common with a 
29-year-old woman starting her first marriage and first career than she does with 
another 49-year-old woman whose last child just moved out of the house Clas- 
sifying Americans by the life events they have experienced, rather than by demo- 
graphic traits, can yield insights and understanding into a market that might 
otherwise have been overlooked. In conjunction with Modem Maturity, Roper has 
identified seven life stage segments that demonstrate the appeal and rewards of 
marketing to consumers by life stage. 




HE WALL STKETJOURNAL. 



IN PRACTICE 

Internal planning processes in mar- 
keting organizations focus on an 
organization's strengths and weak- 
nesses, bUl organizations must aiso 
consider the impact of external 
environmental factors. By under- 
standing how external elements of 
the marketplace affect an organiza- 
tion's planning process, marketers 
can develop strategies that capital- 
ize on opportunities and minimize 
threats. 

Legal and ethical issues pose 
complex challenges for marketers. 
From product liability to deregula- 
tion, the external environment 
varies by state and country, The 
Interactive lournal helps you keep 
up with legal and ethical issues that 
affect organizations, On the Front 
Section, select Marketplace. On the 
left menu in Marketplace, select 
Law. Here you will find articles 
about discrimination suits, recent 
legal rulings, and product liability 
claims, Articles are both national 
and international in scope. 

Economic and political issues 
are as variable as legal issues, and 
are impacted by government/indus- 
try relationships, consumer spend- 
ing habits, and political leadership. 
The Interactive journal helps you 
keep up with these issues as well. 
On the Front Section, select Politics 
& Policy under In this Section on 
the left menu, Here you will find 
articles about pending legislation, 
government mandates, tax propos- 
als, and policy directives. These arti- 
cles are also national and 
international in scope. 

Technology is rapidly changing 
the external environmenLThe 
Interactive lournal provides you 
with in-depth information and 



analysis on technology in Tech Cen- 
ter. From the Front Section, select 
Tech Center. You can use this new 
menu to read the iatest on tech 
stocks and personal technology. 
Select Tech Briefs to find out what 
is happening with leading compa- 
nies. On the right side of your 
screen yOU'll find headings with dif- 
ferent topics. Page down to locate 
Tech Resources. Here you'll find 
links to Company Profiles, Issue 
Briefings, and a Dot-Com Layoffs 
and Shutdowns list. Select one of 
these links now. 

The Interactive Journal also 
features a weekly personal technol- 
ogy column. Under Free WSJ.com 
Sites on the Front Section, select 
Personal Tech. 

DELIVERABLE 

Select Microsoft under the Com- 
pany Profiles link in the Tech 
Resources Section of Tech Center. 

Also search the interactive Journal 
by using the Search feature under 
Journal Atlas on the left menu for 
articles about Microsoft. Discuss the 
legaL ethica;, and political issues in 
the antitrust suit filed against the 
company. Also discuss the implica- 
tions of the suit on the company's 
technology. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 

1. To what extent can marketers 
foresee opportunities and 
threats posed by the external 
environment? What factors can 
alter forecasts? 

2. What steps can organizations 
take to ensure external ele- 
ments are factored into the 
strategic planning process? 

3. How can the information found 



in the Interactive Journal be uti- 
lized to help organizations take 
advantage of market opportuni- 
ties? Divert threats? 



122 



DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 1 23 



SUMMARY 



In this chapter, the importance Of understanding environmental forces was discussed. Marketing deci- 
sions are affected by external agencies, competitors, regulators, the economy, technology, and the social 
factors. Each of these elements of the marketing environment must be monitored continuously for 
changes that are taking place. Changes affect the way marketers go about providing want- and need- 
satisfying products. 

Information about external forces must be gathered for each stage of the strategic marketing 
planning process. The purpose of collecting and analyzing such information is to reduce the uncer- 
tainty associated with marketing decision making. While experience is an important resource, new 
problems or old problems that require new solutions require that marketers stay abreast of market- 
place developments so that they can continue to offer successful products and service to the market- 
place. 



MARKETERS VOCABULARY 



External environment Forces external to the organization that affect organization and marketing 
decision making. 

External analysis The identification of trends, opportunities, and threats that will influence mar- 
keting strategy and tactics. 

Marketing research supplier An external agency that specializes in the conduct of marketing 
research demography-the study of important population statistics such as age, income, sex, and 
location of people. 

Business cycle The pattern that is generally followed by a fluctuating economy. 

Prosperity A period of time during which the economy is growing. 

Recession A period of time that is characterized by a decrease in the rate of growth of the 
economy. 

Depression A long-lasting recession during which unemployment is very high, buying power is 
very low, and consumers are unwilling to spend. 

Recovery A period of time in which unemployment begins to decline, buying power increases, 
and consumers become more willing to purchase products. 

Technology The knowledge of how to accomplish tasks and goals. 

Buying power The ability of a consumer to make purchases. 

Regulators The set of laws, agencies, and policies established to ensure that marketers compete 
legally in their efforts to provide want- and need-satisfying products and services. 



DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 



1. Describe the role of external analysis in the strategic marketing planning process. 

2. Of what importance is environmental scanning to marketing decision makers? 

3. Several external forces were presented in this chapter. Describe each and provide a brief state- 
ment as to the impOltance of each of these to the marketing planner. 



124 



CHAPTER 5 EXTERNAL CONSIDERATIONS IN MARKETING 



PROJECT 



4. External agencies can provide valuable marketing services to marketing organizations. Under what 
circumstances do you think that a marketing organization might seek the services of an external 
agency like a distributor? A marketing research supplier? An advertising agency? A materials 
supplier? 

5. Comment on the impact that the decline of mass marketing might have on marketing strategists 
for companies that have typically mass marketed products. 

6. How should a marketing organization define its competition? 

7. What role do plice competition and discount promotions play in the marketing of products? Do 
you think that the use of these strategies has been effective from [he standpoint of organizations? 
Customers? 

8. Briefly describe the impact that each of the following has on marketing activity: regulators, the 
economy, and technology. 



Since Pathfinder touched down on Mars, much has been learned about the Red Planet. But did you 
know that sales of Mattel's Hot Wheels Mars Rover Action Pack skyrocketed and that sales of Mars 
bars increased dramatically? 

The activities of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) from Alan Shep- 
ard's first space flight to today's Pathfinder have spawned many new products and spuLTed the sales 
of many products. Track key NASA events, like landing on the moon, and see which products' sales 
were boosted by some of these events. Also, discover what new products entered into the market- 
place as a result of developments in space technology. 



CASE APPLICATION 



oliapple is in a financial funk. 
Clearly Canadian is in a sales free-fall. 
Results are mixedfor Pepsi's juice line. 
Coca-Cola's Fruitopia is off to a slow start. 

These could have been headlines for these Mew Age beverages. They do accurately describe their 
performance. At the same time, "plain old' carbonated beverages were making a comeback after years 
of flat sales. 

One reason cited for these results is the fading intensity of America's health kick. Consumers 
seem to have grown weary of sipping "all-natural" teas and juices. Many have returned to chugging 
sweet, fizzy colas. A second reason, according to taste researchers, is that people quickly get tired of 
the taste of distinctive juices and unusual teas. According to one industry expert, a third reason is that 
many consumers got caught up in the mystical, good-for-you, Generation X phenomenon. The phe- 
nomenon was cute and interesting for a while, but had no staying power, 

A fourth reason cited for waning consumer interests is in consumer perceplions. Originally, 
many consumers believe that all-natural sodas, teas, and juices were healthier than brown colas. How- 
ever, it has been discovered that many of these alternative beverages contain more sugar than do tra- 
ditional colas. 

Finally, the new generation of soft drinks has not pleased bottlers . Many bottlers spend mil- 
lions of dollars to overhaul their product lines or change their distribution systems to accommodate 
the new soft dlinks. Despite the many new products, New Age beverages have resulted in only small 
sales increases. 



REFERENCES 



125 



REFERENCES 



Sales of these alternative beverages are still growing, reaching a level of $5.36 billion in 1999. 
In that same year, the soft drink industry had total sales of about $51 billion. 

Some industry experts are predicting an industry shakeout. Their reasoning is that New Age 
beverage sales are driven by trendy young consumers who are constantly seeking the latest drink. 
Tapping into this young generation, over 100 companies introduced a New Age beverage into the 
marketplace. 

Questions: 

1. Describe the external factors that have an impact on the soft drink industry. 

2. How would you assess the competitive situation in the soft drink industry? 

3. What marketing strategies might be appropriate for soft drink marketers in order to improve 
sales of New Age beverages? 



1. Subhash C. Jain, Marketing Planning and Strategy, South-Western 6. Oscar Suris, "Electric Cars Also Pollute Air, EPA Study Says," The 



Publishing Co., Cincinnati, OH, 1981, p. 67. 

2. Robert H. Malott, 1981 , "An Overdose of Lawsuits," excerpts from 
a speech in Friendly Exchange, August, 27-28. 

3. Witcher, S. Karene, "A Driving Tip From Down Under: Keep Those 
Roos Off the Bullbar," The Wall Street Journal, (July 14, 1994), BI. 

4. Robert 1. Samuelson, "The Joy of Deregulation," Newsweek, (Feb- 
ruary 3, 1997), p. 39. 

5. Alan R. Andreasen "Social Marketing: It's Definition and Domain," 
Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, Vol. 13(1), Spring 1994, 
108-114. 



Wall Street Journal, (Aprils, 1994), BI.B8. 

7. Peter Francese, "America At Mid -Decade," American Demographics, 
Feb, 1995, pp. 12-31. 

8. Laurie Freeman, "No Tricking the Media-Savvy," Advertising Age, 
Feb 6, 1995, p. 30. 

9. "The Power to Create Competitive Advantage," Roper Starch World- 
wide, 2000. 



CHAPTER6 



MARKETING IN GLOBAL MARKETS 



LEARNING OBJECTIVES 



As you read through this chapter, you should develop an understand- 
ing of the following key points related to global marketing activities: 
Global marketing is very broad in scope. 

There are many reasons why firms chose to engage in global 
marketing. 

The elements of the environment of global marketing are differ- 
ent than those for domestic markets. 

Firms can enter foreign markets through a variety of strategies, 
each of which has advantages and disadvantages. 
In planning marketing mix strategies, firms cannot simply copy 
domestic marketing mix strategies. 



GOOD LUCK GETTING INTO CHINA 



Itk 



►a wet morning in Old Shanghai, and Dell salesman Peter Chan is selling hard. As 
the Yangtze River flows by the Bund district a few floors below, Chan is getting into a 
flow of his own. His subject: computers and the unique benefits of Dell's direct- selling 
model. His customer: Xiao Jian Yi, deputy general Manager of China Pacific Insurance, 
a fast-growing state-owned insurance company. The audience: three of Xiao's 
subordinates. 

Dell's aggressiveness is beginning to payoff. Not only did Dell reel in the China 
Pacific account, but it is also becoming a major player in China. In 1998, 36-year-old 
billionaire Michael Dell opened the fourth Dell PC factory in the world in Ziamen, a 
windswept city halfway between Hong Kong and Shanghai in China's southeastern 
coast. The point of Dell's push into China seems so obvious as to be a cliche: China is 
becoming too big a PC market for Dell, or anyone, to ignore. "If we're not in what will 
soon be the second biggest PC market in the world," asks John Legere, president of Dell 
Asia-Pacific, "then how can Dell possibly be a global player')" 

Though the competition is intense, Dell is confident it has a strategy that will pay 
off. First, it has decided not to target retail buyers, who account for only aoout 10% of 
Dell's China sales. That way Dell avoids going head-to-head against entrenched local 
market leaders like Legend. "It takes nearly two years of a person's savings to buy a PC 
in China," notes Mary Ma, che chief financial officer of Legend. "And when two years of 
savings is at stake, the whole family wants to come out to a store to touch and try the 
machine." Dell just isn't set up to make that kind of sale yet. 



126 



DEFINING INTERNATIONAL MARKETING 1 27 

One thing's for sure: the Dell model is working in China. And as long as China's 
PC market continues to grow, Dell is ready to grow with it. 

Sources: Nell Chowdury, "Dell Cracks China," Fortune, June 21,1999, pp. [20-1 29; Normandy Madden, "OM's Buick Rides 
Luxury into China. 1 Advertising Age, June 24,1999, p. 16; Carolyn Edy, "The Olympics of Marketing. Americon Demogroph. 
to, June 1999. p. 47. 



INTRODUCTION 



Companies throughout the world have discovered that they have saturated their local mar- 
ket and are seeking opportunities for growth elsewhere. Ford Motors, Campbell Soup, Nestle, 
Nike, and McDonald's are just a few of the companies that have had an international pres- 
ence for many years. Thanks to the opening of Eastern Europe and China, the international 
marketplace has grown dramatically. Still, moving into other markets is tricky business and 
many companies have failed miserably. One thing is for sure: it requires more than taking 
an existing domestic marketing strategy and transplanting it in another culture. 

The purpose of this chapter is to introduce you to the scope and complexity of going 
global with a marketing effort. In the following sections, we define global marketing and 
examine various aspects of the global marketing environment. Against this background, we 
then look at the ways in which companies typically become involved in global markets, 
and introduce you to the global marketing management process. 



DEFINING INTERNATIONAL MARKETING 



Now that the world has entered the next millennium, we are seeing the emergence of an 
interdependent global economy that is characterized by faster communication, transporta- 
tion, and financial flows, all of which are creating new marketing opportunities and chal- 
lenges. Given these circumstances, it could be argued that companies face a deceptively 
straightforward and stark choice: they must either respond to the challenges posed by this 
new environment, or recognize and accept the long-term consequences of failing to do so. 
This need to respond is not confined to firms of a certain size or particular industries. It is 
a change that to a greater or lesser extent will ultimately affect companies of all sizes in 
virtually all markets. The pressures of the international environment are now so great, and 
the bases of competition within many markets are changing so fundamentally, that the oppor- 
tunities to survive with a purely domestic strategy are increasingly limited to small- and 
medium-sized companies in local niche markets. 

Perhaps partly because of the rapid evolution of international marketing, a vast array 
of terms have emerged that suggest various facets of international marketing. Clarification 
of these terms is a necessary first step before we can discuss this topic more thoroughly. 

Let's begin with the assumption that the marketing process outlined and discussed 
in Chapters 1-4 is just as applicable to domestic marketing as to international marketing. 
In both markets, we are goal-driven, do necessary marketing research, select target mar- 
kets, employ the various tools of marketing (i.e., product, pricing, distribution, communi- 
cation), develop a budget, and check our results. However, the uncontrollable factors such 
as culture, social, legal, and economic factors, along with the political and competitive envi- 
ronment, all create the need for a myriad of adjustments in the marketing management process. 

At its simplest level, international marketing involves the firm in making one or more 
marketing decisions across national boundaries. At its most complex, it involves the firm 
in establishing manufacturing and marketing facilities overseas and coordinating marketing 



128 CHAPTER 6 MARKETING IN GLOBAL MARKETS 



strategies across markets. Thus, how international marketing is defined and interpreted 
depends on the level of involvement of the company in the international marketplace. There- 
fore, the following possibilities exist: 

• Domestic marketing. This involves the company manipulating a series of control- 
lable variables, such as price, advertising, distribution, and the product, in a largely 
uncontrollable external environment that is made up of different economic struc- 
tures, competitors, cultural values, and legal infrastructure within specific political 
or geographic country boundaries. 

International marketing. This involves the company operating across several mar- 
kets in which not only do the uncontrollable variables differ significantly between 
One market and another, but the controllable factors in the fonn of cost and price 
structures, opportunities for advertising, and distributive infrastructure are also likely 
to differ significantly. Degree of commitment is expressed as follows: 

-■ Export marketing. In this case the firm markets its goods and/or services ad'OSS 
national/political boundaries. 

6 Multinational marketing. Here the marketing activities of an organization include 
activities, interests, or operations in more than one country, and whee there is 
some kind of influence or control of marketing activities from outside the coun- 
try in which the goods or services will actually be sold. Each of these markets 
is typically perceived to be independent and a profit center in its own right. 

• Global marketing. The entire organization focuses on the selection and explo- 
ration of global marketing opportunities and marshals resources around the 
globe with the objective of achieving a global competitive advantage. The pri- 
mary objective of the company is to achieve a synergy in the overall Opera- 
tion, so that by taking advantage of different exchange rates, tax rate, labor 
rates, skill levels, and market opportunities, the organization as a whole will 
be greater than the sum of its parts, i 

Thus Toyota Motors started out as a domestic marketer, eventually exported its cars 
to a few regional markets, grew to become a multinational marketer, and today is a true 
global marketer, building manufacturing plants in the foreign country as well as hiring local 
labor, using local ad agercies, and complying to that country's cultural mores. As it moved 
from one level to the next, it also revised attitudes toward marketing and the underlying 
philosophy of business. 

Ultimately, the successful marketer is the one who is best able to manipulate the con- 
trollable tools of the marketing mix within the uncontrollable environment. The principal 
reason for failure in international marketing results from a company not conducting the nec- 
essary research, and as a consequence, misunderstanding the differences and nuances of 
the marketing environment within the country that has been targeted. 



STANDARDIZATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 



In 1983, Harvard marketing professor Theodore Levitt wrote an article entitled, "The Glob- 
alization of Markets," and nothing about marketing has been the same since. 2 According 
to Levitt, a new economic reality-the emergence of global consumer markets for single- 
standard products — has been triggered in part by technological developments. Worldwide 
communications ensure the instant diffusion of new lifestyles and pave the way for a whole- 
sale transfer of goods and services. 



REASONS FOR ENTERING INTERNATIONAL MARKETS 1 29 

Adopting this global strategy provides a competitive advantage in cost and effectiveness. 
In contrast to multinational companies, standardized (global) corporations view the world 
or its major regions as one entity instead of a collection of national markets. These world 
marketers compete on a basis of appropriate value: i.e., an optimal combination of price, 
quality, reliability, and delivery of products that are identical in design and function. Ulti- 
mately, consumers tend to prefer a good price/quality ratio to a highly customized but less 
cost-effective item. 

Levitt distinguished between products and brands. While the global product itself is 
standardized or sold with only minor modifications, ihe branding, positioning, and promotion 
may have to reflect local conditions. 

Critics of Levitt's perspective suggest that his argument for global standardization is 
incorrect and that each market strategy should be customized for each country. Kotler notes 
that one study found that 80% of U.S. exports required one or more adaptations. FUlther- 
more, the average product requires at least four to five adaptations out of a set of eleven 
marketing elements: labeling, packaging, materials, colors, name, product features, adver- 
tising themes, media, execution , price, and sales promotion. 3 Kotler suggests that all eleven 
factors should be evaluated before standardization if! considered. 

To date, no one has empirically validated either perspective. While critics of Levitt 
can offer thousands of anecdotes contradicting the validity of standardization, a more care- 
ful read of Levitt's ideas indicate that he offers standardization as a strategic option, not a 
fact. Although global marketing has its pitfalls, it can also yield impressive advantages. Stan- 
dardized products can lower operating costs. Even more important, effective coordination 
can exploit a company's best product and marketing ideas. 

Too often, executives view global marketing as an either/or proposition— either full 
standardization or local control. But when a global approach can fall anywhere on a 
spectrum-from tight worldwide coordination on programm:ng details to loose agreements 
on a product ideas-there is no reason for this extreme view. In applying the global mar- 
keting concept and making it work, flexibility is essential. The big issue today is not whether 
to go global, but how to tailor the global marketing concept to fit each business and how 
to make it work. 



REASONS FOR ENTERING INTERNATIONAL MARKETS 

Many marketers have found the internatiol"al marketplace to be extremely hostile. A study 
by Baker and Kynak,4for example, found that less than 20% of firms in Texas with export 
potential actually carried out business in international markets. But although many firms 
view in.ernational markets with trepidation, others still make the decision to go interna- 
tional. Why? 

I n one study, the following motivating factors were given for initiating overseas mar- 
keting involvement (in order of importance): 5 

1. Large market size 

2. Stability through diversification 

3. Profit potential 

4. Unsolicited orders 

5. Proximity of market 

6. Excess capacity 



130 CHAPTER 6 MARKETING IN GLOBAL MARKETS 



7. Offer by foreign distributor 

8. Increasing growth rate 

9. Smoothing out business cycles 

Other empirical studies over a number of years have pointed to a wide variety of reasons 
why companies initiate international involvement. These include the saturation of the domes- 
tic market, which leads firms either to seek other less competitive markets or to take on the 
competitor in its home markets; the emergence of new markets, particularly in the devel- 
oping world; governmelt incentives to export; tax incentives offered by foreign govern- 
ments to establish manufacturing plants in their countries in order to create jobs; the 
availability of cheaper or more skilled labor; and an attempt to minimize the risks of a reces- 
sion in the home country and spread risk 6 



REASONSTO AVOID INTERNATIONAL MARKETS 



Despite attractive opportunities, most businesses do not enter foreign markets. The reasons 
given for not going international are numerous. The biggest barrier to entering foreign mar- 
kets is seen to be a fear by these companies that their products are not marketable over- 
seas, and a consequent preoccupation with the domestic market. The following points were 
highlighted by the findings in the previously mentioned study by Barker and Kaynak, who 
listed the most important barriers:? 

1. Too much red tape 

2. Trade barriers 

3. Transportation difficulties 

4. Lack of trained personnel 

5. Lack of incentives 

6. Lack of coordinated assistance 

7. Unfavorable conditions overseas 

8. Slow payments by buyers 

9. Lack of competitive products 

10. Payment defaults 

11. Language barriers 

it is the combinatioa of these factors that determines not only whether companies become 
involved in international markets, but also the degree of any i:lVolvement. 



THE STAGES OF GOING INTERNATIONAL 



Earlier in our discussion on definitions, we identified several terms that relate to how com- 
mitted a firm is to being international. Here we expand on these concepts and explain the 
rationale behind this process. Two points should be noted. First, the process tends to be 
ranked in order of "least risk and investment" to "greatest involvement." Second, these are 
not necessarily sequential steps, even though exporting is apparently most common as an 
initial entry. 



THE STAGES OF GOING INTERNATIONAL 131 

Firms typically approach involvement in international marketing rather cautiously, 
and there appears to exist an underlying lifecycle that has a series of critical success fac- 
tors that change as a firm moves through each stage. For small- and medium-sized firms 
in particular, exporting remains the most promising alternative to a full-blooded interna- 
tional marketing effort, since it appears to offer a degree of control over risk, cost, and resource 
commitment. Indeed, exporting, especially by the smaller firms, is often initiated as a response 
to an unsolicited overseas order-these are often perceived to be less risky. 

Exporting 

In general, exporting is a simple and low risk-approach to entering foreign markets. Firms 
may choose to export products for several reasons. First, products in the maturity stage of 
their domestic lifecycle may find new growth opportunities overseas, as Perrier chose to 
do in the U.S. Second; some firms find it less risky and more profitable to expand by export- 
ing current products instead of developing new products. Third, firms who face seasonal 
domestic demand may choose to sell their products to foreign markets when those prod- 
ucts are "in season" there. Finally, some firms may elect to export products because there 
is less competition overseas. 

A firm can export its products in one of three ways: indirect exporting, semi-direct 
expOlting, and direct exporting. Indirect exporting is a common practice among firms that 
are just beginning their exporting. Sales, whether foreign or domestic, are treated as domes- 
tic sales. All sales are made through the firm's domestic sales department, as there is no 
export department, indirect exporting involves very little investment, as no overseas sales 
force or other types of contacts need be developed. Indirect exporting also involves little 
risk, as international marketing intermediaries have knowledge of markets and will make 
fewer mistakes than sellers. 

In semi-direct exporting, an American exporter usually initiates the contact through 
agents, merchant middlemen, or other manufacturers in the U.S. Such semidirect export- 
ing can be handled in a variety of ways: (1) a combination export manager, a domestic agent 
intermediary that acts as an exporting department for several noncompeting firms; (2) the 
manufacturer's export agent (MEA) operates very much like a manufacturer's agent in domes- 
tic marketing settings; (3) a Webb-Pomerene Export Association may choose to limit coop- 
eration to advertising, or it may handle the exporting of the products of the association's 
members and; (4) piggyback exporting, in which one manufacturer (carrier) that has export 
facilities and overseas channels of distribution handles the exporting of another firm's (rider) 
noncompeting but complementary products. 

When direct exporting is the means of entry into a foreign market, the manufacturer estab- 
lishes an export department to sell directly to a foreign film. The exporting manufacturer con- 
ducts market research, establishes physical distribution, and obtains all necessary export 
documentation. Direct exporting requires B greater investment and also carries a greater risk. 
However, it also provides greater potential return and greater control of its marketing program. 

Licensing 

Under a licensing agreement, a finn (licensor) provides some technology to a foreign finn 
(licensee) by granting that firm the right to use the licensor's manufacturing process, brand 
name, patents, or sales knowledge in return for some payment. The licensee obtains a com- 
petitive advantage in this arrangement, while the licensor obtains inexpensive access to a 
foreign market. 



1 32 CHAPTER 6 MARKETING IN GLOBAL MARKETS 



A Jicensing arrangement contains risk, in that if the business is very successful, profit 
potentials are limited by the licensing agreement. Alternatively, a licensor makes a long- 
term commitment to a firm and that firm may be less capable than expected. Or, the licensee 
may be unwilling to invest the necessary resources as needed to be successful. Licersing 
may be the least profitable alternative for market entry. Scarce capital, import restrictions, 
or government restrictions may make this the only feasible means for selling in another 
country. 

Franchising represents a very popular type of licensing arrangement for many con- 
sumer products finns. Holiday Inn, Hertz Car Rental, and McDonald's have all expanded 
into foreign markets through franchising. 

Joint Ventures 

A joint venture is a partnership between a domestic finn and a foreign firm. Both partners 
invest money and share ownership and control of partnership. Joint ventures require a greater 
commitment from firms than licensing or the various other exporting methods. They have 
more risk and less flexibility . 

A domestic firm may wish to engage in a joint venture for a variety of reasons; for 
example, General Motors and Toyota have agreed to make a subcompact car to be sold through 
GM dealers using the idle GM plant in California. Toyota's motivation was to avoid U.S. 
import quotas and taxes on cars without any U.S. -made parts. 

Direct Investment 

Multinational organizations may choose to engage in full-scale production and marketing 
abroad. Thus, they will invest in wholly owned subsidiaries. An organization using this 
approach makes a direct investment in one or more foreign nations. Organizations engag- 
ing in licensing or joint ventures do not own manufacturing and marketing facilities abroad. 
By establishing overseas subsidiaries, a multinational organization can compete more 
aggressively because it is "in" the marketplace. However, subsidiaries require more invest- 
ment as the subsidiary is responsible for all marketing activities in a foreign country. While 
such ope: ations provide control over marketing activities, considerable risk is involved. The 
subsidiary strategy requires complete understanding of business conditions, cllstoms, mar- 
kets, labor, and other foreign market factors. 

U.S. Commercial Centers 

Another method of doing business overseas has come in the form of U.S. Commercial Cen- 
ters. 8 A Commercial Center serves the purpose of providing additional resources for the 
promotion of exports of U.S. goods and services to host countries. The Commercial Cen- 
ter does so by familiarizing U.S. exporters with industries, markets, and customs of host 
countries . They are facilitating agencies that assist with the three arrangements just discussed. 
U.S. Commercial Centers provide business facilities such as exhibition space, con- 
ference rooms, and office space. They provide translation and clerical services. They have 
a commercial library. They have commercial law information and trade promotion facili- 
ties, including the facilitation of contacts between buyers, sellers, bankers, distributors, agents, 
ano government officials. They also coordinate trade missions and assist with contracts and 
export and import arrangements. 



THE INTERNATIONAL MARKETING PLAN 



133 



1. International marketing involves the firm in making one 
or more marketing decisions across national boundaries. 

2. The debate between standardization versus customization 
of the international marketing strategy is unsettled; best 
to consider on a case-by-case basis . 

3. There are many reasons to enter an international market 
led by large market size and diversification. 



4. There are also several reasons to avoid entering interna- 
tional markets, including too much red tape, trade barri- 
ers, and transpOitation difficulties . 

5. The stages of going international are as follows: export- 
ing, licensing, joint ventures, direct investment, U.S. com- 
mercial centers, trade intermediaries, and alliances. 



Trade Intermediaries 

Small manufacturers who are interested in building their foreign sales are turning to trade 
intermediaries to assist them in the sale and distribution of their products. These entrepre- 
neurial middlemen typically buy U.S. -produced goods at 15% below a manufacturer's best 
discount and then resell the products in overseas markets. These trade intermediaries account 
for about 10% of all U.S. exports. 9 The trade intermediary provides a valuable service to 
small companies, which often do not have the resources or expertise to market their prod- 
ucts overseas. The trade intermediaries have developed relationships with foreign countries; 
these relationships are time-consuming and expensive to develop. 

Alliances 

Heineken, the premium Dutch beer, is consumed by more people in more countries than 
any other beer, to It is also the number-one imported beer in America. Miller and Budweiser, 
the two largest American beer producers, have entered into global competition with Heineken, 
partly because the American beer market has been flat. They are doing so by forming alliances 
with global breweries such as Molson, Corona, and Dos Equis. Heineken has responded to 
the challenge, heavily promoting products such as Amstel Light and Murphy's Irish Stout. 
Heineken has also begun developing an alliance with Asia Pacific Breweries, the maker of 
Tiger Beer. 



THE INTERNATIONAL MARKETING PLAN 



It should be apparent by now that companies and organizations planning to compete effec- 
tively in world markets need a clear and well-focused international marketing plan that is 
based on a thorough understanding of the markets in which the company is introducing its 
products. The challenge, then, of international marketing is to ensure that any international 
strategy has the discipline of thorough research, and an understanding and accurate evalu- 
ation of what is required to achieve the competitive advantage. As such, the decision sequence 
in international marketing (see Figure 6.1) is much larger than that of domestic markets. 
As noted in the next Integrated Marketing box, it is also more complicated. 



134 



CHAPTER 6 MARKETING IN GLOBAL MARKETS 















Data on 








potential markets 


Corporate 
level 




1 










Decision to go 

International 










" 








Stakeholders' 
expectations 
















I 


















Business 


Selection of 
entry methods 


— *- 


Situation 
analysis 








level 
















\ 














Resources/capabilities 






Market 
objectives 
















X 






Functional 
level 




Selection of 
target markets 








,r 








Marketing 
strategies 








~T~ 








Tactics/ 
implementation 








1 








Organization/ 

allocation of 

resources 








I 








Controls/ 

corrections 





FIGURE 6.1 The decision sequence in international marketing 



The Corporate Level 

We begin at the corporate level, where firms decide whether to become involved in inter- 
national markets and determine the resources they are willing to commit. Thus, this stage 
is primarily concerned with the analysis of international markets. Decisions here will be 
dependent on matching the results of that analysis with the company's objectives. These 
objectives, in turn, will be determined by the many motivating factors we have discussed 
in the earlier sections. The level of resources that the company is willing to commit should 
be determined by the strategy that ir needed to achieve the objectives that have been set. 



The Business Level 

Business-level consideration:; begin with the assessment of the stakeholders involved in the 
business. It is important to clearly identify the different stakeholder groups, understand their 
expectations, and evaluate their power, because the stakeholders provide the broad guide- 



THE INTERNATIONAL MARKETING PLAN 



135 



lines within which the finn operates. In the case of international marketing, it is particu- 
larly important to address the concerns of the stakeholders in the host company. 

Recall from Chapter 1 that the situation analysis concerns a thorough examination 
of the factors that influence the businesses' ability to successfully market aproduct or serv- 
ice. The results lead to a realistic set of objectives. Conducting a situation analysis in an 
international setting is a bit more extensive. It not only includes the normal assessment of 
external environmental factors and resources/capabilities, it also includes a determination 
of the level of commitment exhibited by the business, as well as possible methods of entry. 
These last two factors are interrelated in that a company's level of commitment to interna- 
tional markets will directly influence whether they employ exporting, a joint venture, or 
some other method of entry. 

In turn, level of commitment and method of entry are influenced by the evaluation 
of environmental factors as well as resources and capabilities. The latter audits not only 
the weaknesses of the company, but also the strengths of the company, which are often taken 
for granted. This is particularly important in international markets ; for example, customer 
brand loyalty may be much stronger in certain markets than others, and products may be 
at the end of their life in the domestic market but may be ideal for less sophisticated markets. 



GOING GLOBAL TAKES COORDINATION 



Importing technology and the evolution of a global economy 
has made global marketing a reality for many American com- 
panies. Larger corporations are not alone in their pursuit of 
business abroad: the Department of Commerce reports that 
60% of American firms ex.porting products today have fewer 
than 100 employees. American businesses have plenty ofrea- 
sons to market their products in other countries. According 
to consulting firm Deloitte and Touche, about 95% of the 
world's population and two-thirds of its total purchasing power 
are currently located outside the U.S. 

Moreover, the decision to distribute products in other coun- 
tries not only opens new markets, but can also gready expand 
a company's business. For example, if a U.S . bicycle manu- 
facturer focuses only on the U.S. market, it loses the Oppor- 
tunity to increase revenues in countries where bicycles are a 
primary mode of transportation. 

Global marketing can also breathe life into a foundering 
product, and may even extend its lifespan. Additionally, a for- 
eign product often can command a higher price simply because 
consumers around the world expect foreign items to cost more. 

However, implementing a global strategy requires a great 
deal of coordination. For example, many companies that have 
successfully built a strong brand in the U.S. have found that 
their domestic identity has little, if any, impact in markets 
where they are relatively unknown. An advertising campaign 
is one way to deal with this problem. Attaching your corpo- 
rate identity to a known, respected entityin your target mar- 
ket is another. When FedEx, for example, wanted to increase 



its name recognition in Europe, the company teamed with 
clothing manufacturer Benetton, an established name there. 
PedEx sponsors one of Benetton's formula racing cars in 
Europe. 

Karen Rogers, manager of key customer marketing at 
FedEx, added that sponsoring events domestically or inter- 
nationally also gives a company the opportunity to meet with 
perspective customers in a social setting and affords a series 
of spin-offs, such as promotions and product giveaways. 

In distributing products globally, many American corpo- 
rations team with large multinational companies that do not 
offer competitive products but have the resources and 
expertise to distribute and market those goods . This can be a 
cost-effective alternative tosetting up operations outside the 
U.S. 

Many small and mid-sized companies that are uncertain 
whether to open operations in another country investigate the 
possibility of using an export management company. These 
companies typically provide services that range from research 
to negotiating contracts with overseas distributors. 

Sources: Dom DelPrete, "Winning Strategies Lead to Global Mar- 
keting Success;' Marketing News, August 18, 1997, pp. 1-2; 
Frank Rose, "Think Globally, Script LocaJiy," Fortune, Nov. 8, 
1999, pp. 157-16 1; Lambeth Hochwald, "Are You Smart Enough 
to Sell Globally?" Sales and Marketing Management. July 1998, 
pp. 53-55; Erica Rasmusson, "Global Warning," Sales and Mar- 
keting Management, Nov. 2000, p. 17. 



136 CHAPTER 6 MARKETING IN GLOBAL MARKETS 



It is important, too, to evaluate the capacity of the firm to be flexible, adaptable, and proac- 
tive, as these are the attributes necessary for success in a highly competitive and rapidly 
changing world. 

Undoubtedly, environmental factors have received the most attention from marketers 
considering international markets. 



The Functional Level 

Having set the objectives for the company, both at the corporate level and the business level, 
the company can now develop a detailed program of functional activities to achieve the objec- 
tives. Following the integrated approach employed throughout this text, each of the func- 
tional elements (e.g., finance, human resources, research) must be considered jointly. The 
best international marketing strategy is doomed to failure if human resources can't find and 
train the appropriate employees, or research can't modify the product so that it is accept- 
able to consumers in another country. Ultimately, this coordination between business func- 
tions is contingent on the market entry strategy employed as well as the degree of 
standardization or customization deemed. 

Having integrated at the functional level, we next consider integration of the mar- 
keting mix elements. 

Product/Promotion 

Keegann has highlighted the key aspects of marketing strategy as a combination of stan- 
dardization or adaptation of product and promotion elements of the mix and offers five 
alternative and more specific approaches to product policy: 

/. One product, one message, worldwide. While a number of writers have argued 
that this will be the strategy adopted for many products in the future, in practice 
only a handful of products might claim to have achieved this already. 

2. Product extension, promotion adaptation. While the product stays the same, this 
strategy allows for the adaptation of the promotional effort either to target new 
customer segments or to appeal to the particular tastes of individual countries. 

3. Product adaptation, promotion extension. This strategy is used if a promotional 
campaign has achieved international appeal, but the product needs to be adapted 
because of local needs. 

4. Dual adaptation. By adapting both products and promotion for each market, the 
firm is adopting a totally differentiated approach . 

5. Product invention. Firms, usually from advanced nations, that are supplying prod- 
ucts to less well-developed countries adopt product invention. 

Another critical element that is closely aligned with the product and promotion is the 
brand. Anthony O'Reilly, Chairman of H.J. Heinz, believes that the communications rev- 
olution and the convergence of cultures have now set the stage for truly global marketing. 
The age of the global brand is at hand. For example, Heinz was looking to expand its 9 
Lives cat food bran::! and Morris the Cat logo into Moscow. Although it's a stable and suc- 
cessful brand in the U. S., testing and research done by Dimitri Epimov, a local marketing 
manager in Moscow, led Heinz executives to make marketing changes to ensure the prod- 
uct's success in Russia. Namely, a fatter- looking Morris was created for packaging. Another 
discovery: While Americans tend to treat their kitties with tuna, Russian cat-lovers prefer 
to serve beef-flavored food. 



THE INTERNATIONAL MARKETING PLAN 1 37 

As discussed earlier, DrOGUct positioning is a key success factor and reflects the cus- 
tomer's perceptions of the product or service. However, in countries at different stages of 
economic development, the customer segments that are likely to be able to purchase the prod- 
uct and the occasions on which it is bought may be significantly different. For example, while 
KFC and McDonald's restaurants aim at everyday eating for the mass market in the devel- 
oped countries, in less-developed countries they are perceived as places for special-occasion 
eating, and are beyond the reach of the poorest segments of the population. The product posi- 
tioning, therefore, must vary in some dimensions. In confioning the positioning of a prod- 
uct or service in a specific market or region, it is therefore necessary to establish ill the 
consumers perception exactly what the product stands for and how it differs from existing 
and potential competition by designing an identity that confirms the value of the product. 

Pricing 

Pricing products in foreign nations is complicated by exchange rate fluctuations, tariffs, gov- 
ernmental intervention, and shipping requirements. A common strategy involves amarkete r 
setting a lower price for their products in foreign markets . This strategy is consistent with 
the low income levels of many foreign countries, and the lower price helps to build mar- 
ket share. Pricing strategies are also strongly influenced by the nature and intensity of the 
competition in the various markets. 

For these reasons, it is important to recognize at the outset that the development and 
implementation of pricing strategies in international markets should follow the following 
stages: 

1. Analyzing the factors that influence international pricing, such as the cost struc- 
tures, the value of the product, the market strucUire, competitor pricing levels, and 
a variety of environmental constraints 

2. Confioning the impact the corporale strategies should have on pricing policy 

3. Evaluating the various strategic pricing options and selecting the most appropri- 
ate approach 

4. Implementing the strategy through the use of a variety of tactics and procedures 
to set prices 

5. Managing prices and financing international transactions 

Perhaps the most critical factor to be considered when developing a pricing strategy in inter- 
national markets, however, is how the customers and competitors will respond. N'agle ' 2 has 
suggested nine factors that influence the sensitivity of customers to prices, and ali have impli- 
cations for the international marketer. Price senr.itivity reduces: 

• The more distinctive the product is, 

• the greater the perceived quality, 

• the less aware consumers are of substitutes in the market, 

• if it is difficult to make comparisons, 

• if the price of a product represents a small proportion of total expenditure of the 
customer, 

• as the perceived benefit increases, 

• if the product is used in association with a product bought previously, 

• if costs are shared with other parties, 

• if the product cannot be stored. 



1 38 CHAPTER 6 MARKETING IN GLOBAL MARKETS 



Finally, there are several inherent problems associated with pricing in international 
markets. Often companies find it difficult to coordinate and control prices across their activ- 
ities in order to enable them to achieve effective financial performance and their denired 
price positioning. Simply, how can prices be coordinated by the company across the vari- 
ous markets and still make the necessary profit? Difficulty answering this question has led 
to two serious problems. Dumping (when a firm sells a product in a foreign country below 
its domestic price or below its actual costs) is often done to build a company's share of the 
market by pricing at a competitive level. Another reason is that the products being sold may 
be surplus or cannot be sold domestically and are therefore already a burden to the com- 
pany. When companies price their products very high in some countries but competitively 
in others, they engage in a gray market strategy. A gray market, also called parallel import- 
ing, is a situation Wlere products are sold through unauthorized channels of distribution. 
A gray market comes about when individuals buy products in a lower-priced country from 
a manufacturer's authorized retailer, ship them to higher-priced countries, and then sell them 
below the manufacturer's suggested price through unauthorized retailers. 

Considerable problems arise in foreign transactions because of the need to buy and 
sell products in different currencies. Questions to consider are: What currency should a com- 
pany price its products? How should a company deal with fluctuating exchange rates? 

Finally, obtaining payment promptly and in a suitable currency from less developed 
countries can cause expense and additional difficulties. How should a company deal with 
selling to countries where there is a risk of nonpayment? How should a company approach 
selling to countries that have a shortage of hard currency? 

Distribution and Logistics 

Distribution channels are the means by which goods are distributed from the manufacturer 
to the end user. Logistics, or physical distribution management, is concerned with the plan- 
ning, implementing, and control of physical flows of materials and final goods from points 
Of origin to points of use to meet customer needs at a profit. 

Essentially there are three channel links between the seller and buyer. The first link 
is the seller's headquarters organization, which is responsible for supervising the channel, 
and acts as part of the channel itself. Channels between countries represent the second link. 
They are responsible for getting products to overseas markets and payment in return. Finally, 
the third link is the channel structure (logistics) within countries, which distributes the prod- 
vets from their point of entry to the final consumer. 

Distribution st:ategies within overseas markets are affected by various uncontrollable 
factors. First, wholesaling and retailing structure differs widely from one nation to the next. 
So, too, does the quality of service provided. Differences in the size and nature of retail- 



The international marketing plan includes concern for 2. The international marketing environment includes 

a. Corporate level considerations-determining the concern for: 

resources to be allocated a. the social! cultural environment 

b. Business level considerations, including: b. the political/legal environment 

• assessment of stakeholders c. the technological environment 

* the situation analysis d. the economic environment 

c. Functional level considerations that delineate the var- e. the competitive environment 
ious activities that will achieve objectives 



THE INTERNATIONAL MARKETING ENVIRONMENT 1 39 

ers are even more pronounced. Retailers more closely reflect the economic conditions and 
culture of that country; many small retailers dominate most of these countries. 

Physical distribution LO overseas marKetS often requires special marketing planning. 
Many countries have inadequate docking facilities, limited highways, various railroad track 
gauges, too few vehicles, and too few warehouses. Managing product inventories requires 
consideration of the availability of suitable warehousing, as well as the costs of shipping 
in small quantities. 

THE INTERNATIONAL MARKETING ENVIRONMENT 

A number of factors constitute the international environment: social, cultural, political, legal, 
competitive, economic, plus technology. Each should be evaluated before a company makes 
a decision to go international. 

The Social/Cultural Environment 

The cultural environment consists of the influence of religious, family, educational, and social 
systems in the marketing system. Marketers who intend to market their products overseas 
may be very sensitive to foreign cultures. While the differences between our cultural back- 
ground in the United States and those of foreign nations may seem small, marketers who 
ignore these differences risk failure in implementing marketing programs. Failure to con- 
sider cultural differences is one of the primary reasons for marketing failures overseas. Table 
6.1 provides some illustrations of cultural differences around the world. 

This task is not as easy as it sounds, as va.-ioilS features of a culture can create an 
illusion of similarity. Even a common language does not guarantee similarity of interpre- 
tation. For example, in the U.S. we purchase "cans" of various grocery products, but the 
British purchase "tins." A number of cultural differences can cause marketers problems in 
attempting to market their products overseas. These include: (1) language, (2) color, 
(3) customs and taboos, (4) values, (5) aesthetics, (6) time, (7) business norms, (8) religion, 
and (9) social structures. Each is discussed in the following sections. 

Language 

The importance oflanguage differences cannot be overemphasized, as there are almost 3,000 
languages in the world. Language differences cause many problems for marketers in design- 
ing advertising campaigns and product labels. Language problems become even more seri- 
ous once the people of a country speak several languages. For example, in Canada, labels 
must be in both English and French. In India, there are over 200 different dialects, and a 
similar situation exists in China. 

Colors 

Colors also have different meanings in different cultures. For example, in Egypt, the coun- 
try's national color of green is considered unacceptable for packaging, because religious 
leaders once wore it. In Japan, black and white are colors of mourning and should not be 
used on a product's package. Similarly, purple is unacceptable in Hispanic nations because 
it is associated with death. 

Customs and Taboos 

All cultures have their own unique set of customs and taboos. It is important for marketers 
to learn about these customs and taboos so that they will know what is acceptable and what 



1 40 CHAPTER 6 MARKETING IN GLOBAL MARKETS 

TABLE 6.1 Illustrations of Potential Areas of Misunderstanding Due to Differences in Cultural Norms 

In Ireland, the evening meal is called tea, not dinner. 

In Asia, when a person bows to you, bow your head forward equal or lower than theirs. 

A nod means "no" in Bulgaria and shaking the head side-to-side means "yes:' 

The number 7 is considered bad luck in Kenya, good luck in the Czech Republic, and has magical connotations in Benin. 

Pepsodent toothpaste was unsuccessful in Southeast Asia because it promised white teeth to a culture where black or 

yellow teeth are symbols of prestige. 

In Quebec, a canned fish manufacturer tried to promote a product by showing a woman dressed in shorts, golfing with her 

husband, and planning to serve canned fish for dinner. These activities violated cultural norms. 

Maxwell House advertised itself as the "great American coffee" in Germany. It found out that Germans have little respect 

for American coffee. 

General Motors' "Body by Fisher" slogan became "Corpse by Fisher" when translated into Japanese. 

In German, "Let Hertz Put You in the Driver's Seat" means "Let hertz MakeYou a Chauffeur:' 

In Cantonese, the Philip Morris name sounded the same as a phrase meaning no luck. 

In Hong Kong, Korea, andTaiwan, triangular shapes have a negative connotation. 

In Thailand, it is considered unacceptable to touch a person's head, or pass something over it. 

Red is a positive color in Denmark, but represents witchcraft and death in many African countries. 

Americans usually smile as they shake hands. But some Germans consider smiles overly familiar from new business 

acquaintances. Americans shouldn't say" Wie gehts?" ("How goes it?"). It's also too informal for first meetings. 

If you offer a compliment to a Chinese-speaking person, he or she will decline it, because disagreeing is the polite way to 

accept praise. 

Don't say "Merci" ("Thanks") to a French person's compliment. You might be misinterpreted as making fun. 

Italians wave goodbye as Americans beckon someone-with palm up and fingers moving back and forth; but in Oriental 

areas, waving with the palm down is not interpreted as goodbye, but rather, "Come here:' 

Offering gifts when you visit a home is expected in Japan, but in the Soviet Union it may be considered a bribe. 

In Brazil and Portugal, businesspeople like to entertain foreigners in their homes. When it's time to go, the host may feel 

constrained to insist that the foreigner stay. Foreigners should politely take their leave. 



is not for their marketing programs. Consider how the following examples could be used 
in development of international marketing programs: 

• In Russia, it is acceptable for men to greet each other with a kiss, but this custom 
is not acceptable in the U.S. 

• Germans prefer their salad dressing in a tube, while Americans prefer it in a bottle. 

• In France, wine is served with most meals, but in America, milk, tea, water, and 
soft drinks are popular. 

McDonalds 's Corporation has opened 20 restaurants in India. Since 80% of Indians 
are Hindu, McDonald's will use a nonbeef meat substitute for its traditional hamburger. 
The likely beef substitute will be lamb, g very popular meat in India. In anticipation of its 
restaurant openings, McDonald's conducted extensive market research, site selection stud- 
ies, and developed a relationship with India's largest chicken supplier. McDonald's has opted 
to market its product in India, largely because India's population of more than 900 million 
represents one sixth of the world's population. 

Values 

An individual's values arise from hislher moral or religious beliefs and are learned through 
experiences For example, in America we place a very high value on material well-being, 
and are much more likely to purchase status symbols than people in India. Similarly, in 



THE INTERNATIONAL MARKETING ENVIRONMENT 141 

India, the Hindu religion forbids the consumption of beef, and fast-food restaurants such 
as McDonald's and Burger King would encounter tremendous difficulties without product 
modification. Americans spend large amounts of money on soap, deodorant, and mouth- 
wash because of the value placed on personal cleanliness. In Italy, salespeople call on women 
only if their husbands are at home. 

Aesthetics 

The term aesthetics is used to refer to the concepts of beauty and good taste. The phrase, 
"Beauty is in the eye of the beholder" is a very appropriate description for the differences 
in aesthetics that exist between cultures. For example, Americans believe that suntans are 
attractive, youthful, and healthy. However, the Japanese do not. 

Time 

Americans seem to be fanatical about time when compared to other cultures. Punctuality 
and deadlines are routine business practices in the US . However, salespeople who set def- 
inite appointments for sales calls in the Middle East and Latin America will have a lot of 
time on their hands, as business people from both of these cultures are far less bound by 
time constraints . To many of these cultures, setting a deadline such as "I have to know next 
week" is considered pushy and rude . 

Business Norms 

The norms of conducting business also vary from one country to the next. Here are several 
examples of foreign business behavior that differ from U.S. business behavior: 

1. In France, wholesalers do not like to promote products. They are mainly inter- 
ested in supplying retailers with the products they need. 

2. In Russia, plans of any kind must be approved by a seemingly endless string of 
committees. As a result, business negotiations may take years. 

3. South Americans like to talk business "nose to nose." This desire for close phys- 
ical proximity causes American business people to back away from the constantly 
forward-moving South Americans. 

4. In Japan, businesspeople have mastered the tactic of silence in negotiations. Amer- 
icans are not prepared for this, and they panic because they think something has 
gone wrong. The result is that Americans become impatient, push for a closure, 
and often make business concessions they later regret. 

These norms are reflected in the difficulty of introducing the Web into Europe (see the next 
Integrated Marketing box) . 

Religious Beliefs 

A person's religious beliefs can affect shopping patterns and products purchased in addi- 
tion to his/her values, as discussed earlier. In the United States and other Christian nations , 
Christmastime is a major sales period. But for other religions, religious holidays do not serve 
as popular times for purchasing products. Women do not participate in household buying 
decisions in countries in which religion serves as opposition to women's rights movements. 
Every culture has a social structure, but some seem less widely defined than others. 
That is, it is more difficult to move upward in a social stmcture that is rigid. For example, 
in the U.S., the two-wage earner family has led to the development of a more affluent set 
of consumers. But in other cultures, it is considered unacceptable for women to work out- 
side the home. 



142 



CHAPTER 6 MARKETING IN GLOBAL MARKETS 



HOOKING UP IN EUROPE 



Everyone in Europe vacations in August, and business is 
booming at Internet Train, the perhaps inappropriately 
named chain of Internet cafes in Florence, Italy. Just over the 
Ponte Vechio, the old bridgejoining the Uffizi art gallery with 
Pallazo Pitti, there's a small storefront with 20 personal com- 
puters. Inside, people from around the world peck away at 
their email, communicating with friends and acquaintances 
from more than a hundred countries-for just 6,000 lira (about 
$3) per half hour. 

Thousands of kilometers away in London, near Victoria 
Station, the scene is much the same. Stelio's Haij-Joannu, a 
Greek shipping tycoon and Internet entrepreneur, has created 
Easy EvelYthing, which he claims are the world's largest Inter- 
net cafes. Haij-Joannu boasts nine Internet cafes with 3,900 
PCs ready and available. "Easy Everything ( easy everything, 
com) is wonderful," reports Reade Fahs, CEO of London- 
based First Tuesday, a global Internet networking organiza- 
tion. "You call it an Internet cafe, but it's much more. Most 
Internet cafes are about the coffee with computers on the side. 
This is about 400 thin-screen computers in this very cool envi- 
ronment with a little coffee on the side." 

Of course, the story in Europe goes far beyond email and 
Internet cafes. They're just the top of the innovation revolu- 
tion sweeping Europe from the North to the South. Consider 
easyGroup, which owns easyEverything: easyGroup includes 
easyjet.com and easyRentacar:com (all properties controlled 



by Haij-Joannu). Easyjet.com bills itself as the "Web's favorite 
airline" and markets itself as a discount airline with steep 
incentives for buyers to transact online, EasyRentacar.com is 
"the world's first Internet-only rent-a-car company," he adds. 
He also plans to start easyMoney.com, offering discount mort- 
gages online. 

Still, the challenges of European Internet marketing 
are legion. Putting a B2C (business-to-consumer) or a B2B 
(business-to-business) site up in Europe is much more diffi- 
cult than in the United States. Among the many complexities 
facing pan-European Web sites are the following: 

• Developing a site for multiple languages 

• Developing a site for multiple currencies 

• Providing multilingual customer service 

• Shipping across borders in Europe 

• Handling the value-added tax (VAT) 

• Coping with sllict government regulatory issues 

• Recruiting and retaining people in markets that prohibit 
or curtail stock options and other economic incentives 

Sources: Henry Heilbrunn, "Interactive Marketing in Europe," 
Direct Marketing, March 1998, pp. 98-101; Michael Krauss, 
"Eurol?e Forges Ahead with Web Innovations," Marketing News, 
August 14, 2000, p. 8; Michael Plogell and Felix Hofer, "No-nos 
in Europe," Promo, April 2000, pp. 23-24. 



The Political/Legal Environment 

The politicaVlegal environment abroad is quite different from that of the U.S . Most nations 
desire to become self-reliant and to raise their status in the eyes of the rest of the world. 
This is the essence of nationalism. The nationalistic spirit that exists in many nations has 
led them to engage in practices that have been very damaging to other countries' market- 
ing organizations. For example, foreign governments can inteivene in marketing programs 
in the following ways: 

• Contracts for the supply and delivery of goods and services 

• The registration and enforcement of trademarks, brand names, and labeling 

• Patents 

• Marketing communications 

• Pricing 

• Product safety, acceptability, and environmenial issues 



THE INTERNATIONAL MARKETING ENVIRONMENT 1 43 

Political Stability 

Business activity tends to grow and thrive when a nation is politically stable. When a nation 
is politically unstable, multinational firms can still conduct business profitably. Their strate- 
gies will be affected however. Most firms probably prefer to engage in the export business 
rather than invest considerable sums of money in investments in foreign subsidiaries. Inven- 
tories will be low and curre.lcy will be converted rapidly. The result is that consumers in 
the foreign nation pay high prices, get less satisfactory products, and have fewer jobs. 

Monetary Circumstances 

The exchange rate of a particular nation's currency represents the value of that currency in 
relation to that of another country. Governments set some exchange rates independently of 
the forces of supply and demand. The forces of supply and demand set others. If a coun- 
try's exchange rate is low compared to other countries, that country's consumers must pay 
higher prices on imported goods. While the concept of exchange rates appears relatively 
simple, these rates fluctuate widely and often, thus creating high risks for exporters and 
importers. 

Trading Blocs and Agreements 

U.S. companies make one-third of their revenues from products marketed abroad, in places 
such as Asia and Latin America. The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFfA) fur- 
ther boosts export sales by enabling companies to sell goods at lower prices because of reduced 
tariffs. 

Regional trading blocs represent a group of nations that join together and formally 
agree to reduce trade barriers among themselves. NAFTA is such a bloc. Its members include 
the U.S., Canada, and Mexico. No tariffs exist on goods sold between member nations of 
NAFTA. However, a uniform tariff is assessed on products from countries not affiliated with 
NAFTA. In addition , NAFTA seeks common standards for labeling requirements, food addi- 
tives, and package sizes. 

One of the potentially interesting results of trade agreements like NAFTA is that many 
products previously restricted by dumping laws, laws designed to keep out foreign prod- 
ucts, would be allowed to be marketed. The practice of dumping involves a company sell- 
ing products in overseas markets at very low prices, one intention being to steal business 
from local competitors. These laws were designed to prevent pricing practices that could 
seriously harm local competition. The laws were designed to prevent large producers from 
flooding markets with very low priced products, gain a monopoly, and then raise orices to 
very high levels. In 1993, about 40 nations, counting the European Community as one, had 
anti-dumping legislation. Those in favor of agreements argue that antidumping laws penal- 
ize those companies who are capable of competing in favor of those companies that are not 
competitive. 

Almost all the countries in the Western Hemisphere have entered into one or more 
regional trade agreements. Such agreements are designed to facilitate trade through the estab- 
lishment of a free trade area customs union or customs market. Free trade areas and cus- 
toms unions eliminate trade barriers between member countries while maintaining trade 
barriers with nonmember countries. Customs Unions maintain common tariffs and rates for 
nonmember countries. A common market provides for harmonious fiscal and monetary poli- 
cies while free trade areas and customs unions do not. Trade agreements are becoming a 
growing force for trade liberalization; the development of such agreements provides for 
tremendous opportunities for U.S. companies doing business in Latin America and North 
America. 



1 44 CHAPTER 6 MARKETING IN GLOBAL MARKETS 



The creation of the single European market in 1992 was expected to change the way 
marketing is done worldwide. It meant the birth of a market that was larger than the United 
States, and the introduction of European Currency Units (Euros) in place of the individual 
currencies of member nations. Experience in multilingual marketing would help non-Euro- 
pean companies succeed in this gigantic market. With new technologies such as multilin- 
gual processing programs, it would be possible to target potential customers anywhere in 
Europe, in any language, and in the same marketing campaign. 

Progress toward European unification has been slow-many doubt that complete uni- 
fication will ever be achieved. However, on January 1, 1999, 11 of the 15 member nations 
took a significant step toward unification by adopting the Euro as the common currency. 
These 11 nations represent 290 million people and a $6.5 trillion market. Still, with 14 dif- 
ferent languages and distinctive national customs, it is unlikely that the EU will ever become 
the "United States of Europe." 

Tariffs 

Most nations encourage free trade by inviting firms to invest and to conduct business there, 
while encouraging domestic firms to engage in overseas business. These nations do not usu- 
ally try to strictly regulate imports or discriminate against foreign-based firms. There are, 
however, some governments that openly oppose free trade. For example, many Commu- 
nis Lnations desire self-sufficiency. Therefore, they restrict trade with non-Communist nations. 
But these restrictions vary with East-West relations. 

The most common form of restriction of trade is the tariff, a tax placed on imported 
goods. Protective tariffs are established in order to protect domestic manufacturers against 
competitors by raising the prices of imported goods. Not surprisingly, U.S. companies with 
a strong business tradition in a foreign country may support tariffs to discourage entry by 
other U.S. competkorG. 

Expropriation 

All multinational firms face the risk of expropriation. That is, the foreign government takes 
ownership of plants, sometimes without compensating the owners. However, in many expro- 
priations there has been payment, and it is often equitable. Many of these facilities end up 
as private rather than government organizations. Because of the risk of expropriation, multi- 
national firms are at the mercy of foreign governments, which are sometimes unstable, and 
which can change the laws they enforce at any point in time to meet their needs. 

TheTechnological Environment 

The level of technological development of a nation affects the attractiveness of doing busi- 
ness there, as well as the type of operations that are possible. Marketers in developed nations 
cannot take many technological advances for granted. They may not be available in lesser- 
developed nations. Consider some of the following technologically related problems that 
firms may encounter in doing business overseas: 

• Foreign workers must be trained to operate unfamiliar equipment. 

• Poor transportation systems increase production and physical distribution costs. 

• Maintenance standards vary from one nation to the next. 

• Poor communication facilities hinder advertising through the mass media. 

• Lack of data processing facilities makes the tasks of planning, implementing, and 
controlling marketing strategy more difficult. 



THE INTERNATIONAL MARKETING ENVIRONMENT 1 45 

The Economic Environment 

A nation's economic situation represents its current and potential capacity to produce goods 
and services. The key to understanding market opportunities lies in the evaluation of the 
stage of a nation's economic growth. 

A way of classifying the economic growth of countries is to divide them into three 
groups: (1) industnalized, (2) developing, and (3) less-developed nations. The industrial- 
ized nations are generally considered to be the United States, Japan, Canada, Russia, Aus- 
tralia and most of Western Europe The economies of these nations are characterized by 
private enterprise and aconr.umer orientation. They have high literacy, modem technology, 
and higher per capita i;lcomes, 

Developing nations are those that are making the transition from economies based 
on agricultural and raw materials production to industrial economies, Many Latin Ameri- 
can nations fit into this category, and they exhibit rising levels of education, technology, 
and per capita incomes, 

Finally, there are many less developed nations in today's world. These nations have 
low standards of living, literacy rates are low, and technology is very limited. 

Usually, the most significant marketing opportunities exist among the industrialized 
nations, as they have high levels of income, one of the necessary ingredients for the for- 
mation of markets. However, most industrialized nations also have stable population bases, 
and market saturation for many products already exists. The developing nations, on the other 
hand, have growing population bases, and although they currently import limited goods and 
services, the long-run potential for growth in these nations exists. Dependent societies seek 
products that satisfy basic needs- food, clothing, housing, medical care, and education. Mar- 
keters in such nations must be educators, emphasizing information in their market programs, 
As the degree of economic development increases, so does the sophistication of the mar- 
keting effort focused on the countries, 

The Competitive Environment 

Entering an international market is similar to doing so in a domestic market, in that a firm 
seeks to gain a differential advantage by investing resources in that market. Often local firms 
will adopt imitation strategies, sometimes successfully. When they are successful, their own 
nation's economy receives a good boost. When they are not successful, the multinational 
firm often buys them out. 

Japanese marketers have developed an approach to managing product costs that has 
given them a competitive advantage over U.S. competitors. A typical American company 
will design a new product, then calculate the cost. I f the estimated cost is too high, the prod- 
uct will be taken back to the drawing board. In Japan, a company typically starts with a 
target cost based on the price that it estimates the market is most willing to accept. Prod- 
uct designers and engineers are then directed to meet the cost target. This approach also 
encourages managers to worry less about product costs and more about the role it should 
play in gaining market share, Briefly, at Japanese companies like NEC, Nissan, Sharp, and 
Toyota, a team charged with bringing a product idea to market estimates the price at which 
the product is most likely to appeal to the market. From this first impOltantjudgement, all 
else follows. After deducting the required profit margin from the selJing price, planners 
develop estimates of each element that make up the product's cost: engineering, manufac- 
turing, sales, and marketing. U.S. firms tend to build products, figure how much it costs to 
build the product, and then ask whether the product can be sold at a profitable price. U.S. 
companies tend not to assess what the market will be willing to pay. 



1 46 CHAPTER 6 MARKETING IN GLOBAL MARKETS 



Marketing Objectives 

Having identified stakeholder expectations, carried out a detailed situation analysis , and made 
an evaluation of the capabilities of the company, the overall marketing goals can be set. It 
is important to stress that there is a neeo for realism in this, as only too frequently corpo- 
rate plans are determined more by the desire for short-term credibility with shareholders 
than with the likelihood that they will be achieved. 

The process adopted for determining long-term and short-term objectives is impor- 
tant and varies significantly, depending on the size of the business, the nature of the mar- 
ket and the abilities and motivation of managers in different markets. At an operational level, 
ihe national managers need to have an achievable and detailed plan for each country, which 
will take account of the local situation, explain what is expected of them and how their per- 
formance will be measured. Examples of objectives might be: 

s Financial performance, including return on investment and profitability 

• Market penetration, including sales (by volume and value), market share by prod- 
uct category 

• Customer growth, by volume and profitability 

• Distribution, including strength in supply chain, number of outlets 

• Brand awareness and value 

• New product introductions and diffusion 

• Company image, including quality and added value (or service) 




THE WALL STREET JOURNAL. 



IN PRACTICE 

International markets offer organi- 
zations market expansion and 
profit opportunities. However, 
entering international markets 
poses risks and valid reasons to 
avoid entering these markets exist. 
International marketing plans must 
identify the benefits and risks 
involved with international expan- 
sion, and detail the options for 
entry into the foreign market. 

Deciding whether or not to 
adjust its domestic marketing pro- 
gram is a critical issue for any 
organization planning to expand 
internationally. Organizations must 
understand the various environ- 
mental factors affecting interna- 
tional marketing to determine 
whether a standardized or cus- 
tomized marketing mix will be the 
best strategy. 

The Interactive Journal pro- 
vides extensive information about 
world business. On the Front Sec- 
tion, select World-Wide from the 
main page. 

World-Wide focuses on inter- 
national news and events. You'll 
find information about trade agree- 
ments, international governing 
organizations, and regional conflicts 
in this section. Under the Asia, 
Europe, and The Americas head- 
ings, you'll find information specific 
to these regions. General news sto- 
ries, financial markets activity, and 
technology issues are all discussed 
as they pertain to the specific 
region. For country specific infor- 
mation, page down to Country 
News in any of the regional sec- 
tions. Using the drop down menu, 
you'll find links to recent news and 
business articles. 



In the Economy section, you'll 
find an International Calendar of 
Economic Events. On the Front 
Section, select Economy from the 
left menu. In this section you'll also 
find articles about noteworthy eco- 
nomic developments in various 
countries. 

Travel news is found in the 
Business Fare section of Market- 
place. Here you'll find a Currency 
Converter as well as travel related 
business articles. 

DELIVERABLE 

Select one major headline in the 
Asia, Europe, and The Americas 
sections. Use the Country News 
menu to select the specific coun- 
tries discussed and to look for addi- 
tional information about the 
articles you've chosen. Review the 
articles and write a one-paragraph 
synopsis of each. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 

1. How can an organization deter- 
mine its best option for enter- 
ing an international market? 

2. What impact do international 
trade agreements such as 
NAFTA and international gov- 
erning organizations such as 
the World Trade Organization 
have on decisions to expand 
internationally? 

3. Other than the Interactive 
Journal, what other sources 
provide relevant information to 
organizations facing interna- 
tional marketing decisions? 

4. What changes do you anticipate 
in international marketing? 
What countries will influence 
international trade? 



147 



1 48 CHAPTER 6 MARKETING IN GLOBAL MARKETS 

SUMMARY 



Most American firms have discovered that many oppOitunities exist in international marketing, as 
evidenced by the vast amount of goods exported by U.S. -based firms. There are many reasons why 
U.S. firms choose to engage in international marketing. Perhaps the most attractive reasons are the 
market expansion and profit opportunities afforded by foreign markets. 

Basic principles of domestic marketing apply to intelllational marketing. However, there are 
some differences, many of which are centered on environmental factors which affect international 
marketing: (1) the economic environment, (2) the competitive environment, (3) the cultural environ- 
ment, (4) the political/legal environment, and (5) technological environment and the ethical environment. 

Once a firm has decided to enter a particular foreign market, it must decide upon the best way 
to enter that market. A firm has five basic foreign market entry options, the selection of which depends 
largely on the degree of control that the firms wishes to maintain over its marketing program. 

When a firm chooses to market its products internationally, it must decide whether to adjust 
its domestic marketing program. Some firms choose to customize their market programs, adjusting 
their marketing mix to meet the needs of each target market. Others use a standat'dized marKeting 
mix. in making the decision to customize or standardize, there is a wide range of possibilities for 
adapting a finn's product, price, promotion, and distribution strategies. 



MARKETER'S VOCABULARY 



International marketing The marketing of a company's products and/or services outside of that 
company's home nation. 

Multinational marketing Firms thai are involved in marketing as well as production, research, 
human resource management and the employment of a foreign work force. 

Dumping A practice in which a firm attempts to sell discontinued products, seconds, or repaired 
products in overseas markets at below domestic prices. 

Exchange rate The value of one nation's cUlTency in relation to that of another country. 

Tariff A tax placed on imported goods. 

Expropriation The act of a government taking ownership of a firm's plants. 

Indirect exporting Occurs when all of a finn's foreign sales are made through the firm's domes- 
tic sales department. 

Semidirect exporting Occurs when a firm sells products in foreign markets through agents, mer- 
chant middlemen, or other manufacturers. 

Combination export manager A domestic agent intermediary that acts as an exporting depart- 
ment for several noncompeting firms. 

Manufacturers export agent Similar to manufacturer's agents in domestic product setting. 

Webb-Pomerene Export Association Two or more finTIs that compete domestically, but work 
together in exporting their products. 

Piggyback exporting A situation in which one manufacturer that has export facilities and over- 
seas channels of distribution will handle the exporting of another firm's noncompeting but comple- 
mentary products. 

Direct exporting Occurs when a firm establishes an export department to sell directly to a for- 
eign flnn. 



CASE APPLICATION 149 

Licensing An agreement in which a firm (licensor) provides some technology to a foreign firm 
(licensee) by granting the firm the right to use the licensor's manufacturing process, brand name, 
or sales knowledge in return for some payment. 

Joint venture A partnership between a domestic firm and a foreign firm . 

Straight extension The introduction of the same product and the same message in every foreign 

market. 

Communication adaptation A strategy used in foreign markets when the same product can be 
used to satisfy different needs, or if a product is used in a different way in foreign market 

Product adaptation A product is changed to meet individual foreign target market needs. 



DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 



1. What are the reasons a firm might engage in exporting? 

2. How does the economic environment affect international marketing activities? 

3. How does the cultural environment affect international marketing activities? 

4. How does the technological environment affect international marketing activities? 

5. Briefly describe the major strategies a firm might use to enter a foreign market. 

6. Why are prices often lower in foreign markets than in domestic markets? 

7. What are the differences between straight extension, communication adaptation, product adap- 
tation, dual adaptation, and product invention strategies? 

8. What are the reasons why a firm might enter a foreign market by means of a joint venture 
strategy? 

9. Briefly desclibe the methods of distribution used by direct exporters. 

10. Why does direct investment in foreign markets afford marketers the greatest degree of control 
over international marketing activities? 



PROJECT 



Identify a U.S. -made product that is currently sold in the U.S. Develop a marketing plan for this prod- 
uct, assuming they plan to export to Canada. 



CASE APPLICATION 



UNILEVER'S GLOBAL BRAND 

Unilever division Unipath is to begin the global rollout of a contraceptive product that has been 15 
years in secret development and that the company is hailing as a major brand launch. 

"The biggest thing to happen to contraception since the '60s," as the U.K. print and poster ads 
through Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide, London, describes it. Persona is the fruit of tens of millions 
of dollars investment. 



150 CHAPTER 6 MARKETING IN GLOBAL MARKETS 



REFERENCES 



"This is going to be a big Unilever brand," said Senior Brand Development Manager Susan- 
nah Day at its U.K. launch, backed by a $7.8 million marketing campaign that also includes an 
Internet site, a free phone "careline," retailer training, point of purchase displays, and direct mail- 
ings to the medical profession. O&M, a Unilever roster agency, was appointed in 1995 to create 
ads that would work internationally. 

First evidence that all this was not mere launch puffery came at Unilever's results meeting, 
when Co-Chairman Niall FitzGerald revealed sparkling sales and awareness statistics and details of 
the product's march just into Italy and -reland and then into the Netherlands, Scandinavia, and 
Germany. 

In the first few weeks of the U.K. launch, Persona was the biggest selling item by value in the 
1,247 stores nationwide of Boots-the retailer through which the brand was exclusively launched- 
and it achieved 55% consumer awareness within a month. In prelaunch research among hundreds of 
women in the U. K. and Germany, 30% said they were likely to buy the product. 

"We expect Persona to be a mainstream form of contraception in most markets in Europe and 
the U.S.," notes Ms. Day. Plans are to take the brand into 20 countries by 2000, including Australia 
and ultimately, it is expected to go on sale worldwide. This occurred in July of 2000. 

Persona works by measuring a woman's hormone levels via home urine lests and revealing 
the days in a month when she is least at risk of becoming pregnant. An electronic monitor records 
the days in a woman's cycle. On the mornings when a test is required, a yellow light flashes, asking 
for a stick carrying a urine sample to be inserted into the monitor. After the hormone level is meas- 
ured, either z red light denoting high risk or a green light denoting low appears. Reliability is claimed 
to be 95% -the same as condoms. 

Source: Suzanne Bedlake, "Birth of a Global Brand," Ad Age International, March 1997, p. 126; Rainer Hengst, 
"Plotting Your Global Strategy." Direct Marketing , August 2000, pp. 52-55; Eileen P. Moran, "Include Overseas 
Markets the Right Way." Marketing News. April 24, 2000, pp. 47-48. 

Questions: 

1. What will be some of the problems Persona faces as it enters markets outside of Europe? 

2. The initial monitoring machine costs $78, plus $16 a month for the sticks. Will these costs present 
problems? 



1. Isobel Doole, Robin Lowe, and Chris Philips, International Marketing 7. Barker and Kaynak, op. cit. 

Strategy, International Thompson Business Press: London, 1999, pp. 8. Eileen Cassidy Imbach, "U.S. Commercial Centers: The Future of 

14-15. Doing Business Abroad," Business America, November, 1994, 

2. Theodore Levitt. "The Globalization of Markets,'* Harvard Business pp. 25-26. 

Review. May-June 1983, pp. 92-]02. 9. Michael Selz, "More Small Firms Are Turning to Trade Intermedi- 

3. Philip Kotler, "Global Standardization-Courting Danger," Journal aries," The Wall Street Journal, February 2, 1995, p. B2. 

of Consumer Marketing, Vol. 3, No. 2, Spring, ]986, pp. 13- 20. 10. Julia Flunn and Richard A. Melcher, "Heineken's Battle to Stay Top 

4. S. Barker and E. Kaynak, "An Empirical Investigation of the Dif- Bottle," 8usiness Week, August 1, 1998, pp. 60-62. 

ferences Between Initiating and Continuing Exporters," European 1]. Warren J. Keegan , "A Conceptual Framework for Multinational Mar- 

Journal of Marketers, Vol. 26, No. 3, J992. keting," Columbia JounUll ofWorld Business, Vol. 7 , November 1973, 

5. Ibid. p. 67. 

6. Anne Chen and Malt Hicks, "Going Global? Avoid Culture 12. TT Nagle, The Strategies and Tactics ofPricing, Prentice-Han, Inc. 



Clashes," PC Week, April 3, 2000, pp. 68-69. Englewood Cliffs, N.J., ]999. 



CHAPTER 



7 



INTRODUCING AND MANAGING 

THE PRODUCT 



LEARNING OBJECTIVES 



After reading this chapter, you should be able to: 

Look at the meaning of the term "product" from three different 
perspectives: the manufacturer, the consumer, and the public. 

Understand the three levels inherent in all products. 
Learn the classification systems that are used to identify prod- 
ucts, and suggest appropriate marketing strategies. 
Clarify the difference between goods products and service 
products. 

Study some of the processes involved in product pianning and 
strategy formulation: determination of product objectives and 
identification and resolution of factors that have an impact on the 
product. 

Understand the eight steps that make-up the new product devel- 
opment system. 



JAPANESE CARS ON THE DECLINE 



J apan's auto dealers have tried just about everything to revive sales. One Toyota 
Motor Corp. dealership in Tokyo throws monthly festivals in its parking lot and offers 
discounts of as much as $2,500 on new models. But potential customers such as Kai 
Matsuda, a smartly dressed 28 year old, isn't buying. Sure, after spending a recent Sun- 
day touring Toyota's swank four-story Amlux showroom in Tokyo, Matsuda came away 
impressed. The building housed everything from rugged recreational vehicles to sleek 
luxury sedans such as the $37,000 Aristo. Matsuda would love to buy a new car, "if 1 
had the money." But, with Japan's economy on the skids, he doesn't. 

For Japanese carmakers preparing to roll out their new fleets at the Tokyo Motor 
Show, consumers such as Matsuda illustrate why 2000 was such a tough year. Despite a 
flurry of new launches, the recent increase in Japan's consumption tax from 3% to 5% 
has caused car sales to decline for six months in a row. Dealers sold 9% fewer cars in 
September then in the same month a year earlier and several have now fallen into the red 
or have gone bankrupt. 

So carmakers are desperately hoping their 2000 mOdels will boost sales. The 
Motor Show's new lines have the latest in breaking, engine, and transmission technology, 



151 



152 CHAPTER 7 INTRODUCING AND MANAGING THE PRODUCT 



more sporty designs, and more environmentally friendly engines-including a "hybrid" 
car that can get 66 miles per gallon on a combination of gasoline and electricity. "Every 
maker is preparing new launches to keep sales from falling through the floor," says 
Christopher Redl, automotive analyst at ING Barrings Ltd. 

But Japanese consumers are already overwhelmed with choices. "There are now 
over 190 car models available in the market," says Atsushi Fuji.i, member of the board of 
directors in charge of domestic sales at Nissan Motor Co. "And the average consumer 
can only remember about 11 of them." 

Yet at the Motor Show, Japanese carmakers will be coming out with even more. 
Toyota wants to target young people with fun European-looking models and convertible 
sports car. Toyota also plans to roll out the world's first mass-produced hybrid, with sales 
projected at 1,000 a month. The company admits it will see the hybrid as one-third of the 
world's auto market by 2005. After working out the kinks in the hybrid in Japan, Toyota 
plans to take it for a spin in overseas markets. However, analysts worry the hybrid could 
cannibalize sales of other models. "Why would you want to buy a Corona when you 
might be able to buy a hybrid car for just about the same price?" asks Edward Brogan, 
automotive analyst at Salomon Brothers Inc. 

In this chapter we will look at the special chal lenges that the marketing of products 
possess. Moreover, we will delineate the unique characteristics associated with products 
as they pass through the various stages of their lives. Particular attention will be given to 
the kinds of decisions that are necessary through this process. 

SOURCES: Jean Halliday, "Carmakers Learn to Mine Databases:' Advertising Age, April 17,2000, p. S6; Emily Thorton, "Too 
Many Cars, Too Few Buyer," Business Week, Oetober 20,1997, p. 56; Alison S. Wellnei, "Hot Wheels:' Amerieall Demograph- 
ics, August 2000, pp. 48—49; David Kiley, "Not Your Father's STj V," American Demographics, January 1999, pp. 44 — 45, 



INTRODUCTION 



This chapter begins our discussion of the functional areas of marketing. Why do we begin 
our discussion with product rather than with promotion, distribution, or pricing? The answer 
is quite obvious . None of those other functions serve any useful purpose without a com- 
pany product that provides consumer satisfaction. Without a product, there is nothing to 
promote, nothing to distribute, nothing to price, This does not suggest that product is more 
important, rather, it is the impetus for the other marketing functions. Logically, we should 
start at the beginning, and the beginning of a market place is a set of correct decisions about 
the product offerings of the finn. 



DEFININGTHE PRODUCT 



In essence, the tenn "product" refers to anything offered by a finn to provide customer sat- 
isfaction, be it tangible or intangible. It can be a single product, a combination of products, 
a product- service combination, or several related products and services. It nonnally has at 
least a generic name (e.g. banana) and usually a brand name (e.g. Chiquita). Although a 
product is normally defined from the perspective of the manufacturer, it is also important 
to note two other points-of-view-those of the consumer and other relevant pub'ics. 



DEFINING THE PRODUCT 1 53 

For a manufacturer like Kraft Foods, their macaroni-and-cheese dinner reflects a food 
product containing certain ingredients, packaged, distributed, priced and promoted in a unique 
manner, and requiring a certain return on their investment. For the consumer, the product 
is a somewhat nutritious food item that is quick and easy to prepare and is readily con- 
sumed by the family, especially the kids. For a particular public, such as the Food and Drug 
Administration, this product reflects a set of ingredients that must meet particular mini- 
mum standards, in terms of food quality, storage and distribution. 

Making this distinction is important in that all three perspectives must be under- 
stood and satisfied if any product will survive and succeed. Furthermore, this sensitivity 
to the needs of all three is the marketing concept in action. For example, a company might 
design a weight-reduction pill that not only is extremely profitable but also has a wide 
acceptance by the consumer. Unfortunately, it cannot meet the medical standards estab- 
lished by the Federal government. Likewise, Bird's Eye Food might improve the overall 
quality of their frozen vegetables and yet not improve the consumers' tendency to buy 
that particular brand simply because these improvements were not perceived as either 
important or noticeable by the consumer. Therefore, an appraisal of a company's prod- 
uct is always contingent upon the needs and wants of the marketer, the consumer, and 
the relevant publics. We define product as follows: Anything, either tangible or intangi- 
ble, offered by the firm; as a solution to the needs and wants of the consumer; is prof- 
itable or potentially profitable; and meets the requirements of the various publics governing 
or influencing society. 

There are four levels of a product: core, tangible, augmented, and promised (see Fig- 
ure 7.1). We begin with the notion of the core product, which identifies what the consumers 
feel they are getting when they purchase the product. The core benefits derived when an 
overweight 45-year old male purchases a $250 ten-speed bicycle is not transportation; it is 
the hope for better health and improved conditioning. In a similar vein, that same individ- 
ual may install a $16,000 swimming pool in his backyard, not in order to obtain exercise, 
but to reflect the status he so desperately requires. Both are legitimate product cores. Because 
the core product is so individualized, and oftentimes vague, a full-time task of the marketer 
is to accurately identify the core product for a particular target market. 

Once the core product has been indicated, the tangible product becomes important. 
This tangibility is reflected primarily in its quality level, features, brand name, styling, and 
packaging. Literally every product contains these components to a greater or lesser degree. 
Unless the product is one-of-a-kind (e.g., oil painting), the consumer will use at least some 
of these tangible characteristics to evaluate alternatives and make choices. In addition, the 
importance of each will vary across products, situations, and individuals. For example, for 
Mr. Smith at age 25, the selection of a particular brand of new automobile (core product = 
transportation) was based on tangible elements such as styling and brand name (choice = 
Corvette); at age 45, the core product remains the same, while the tangible components such 
as quality level and features become important (choice = Mercedes). 

At the next level lies the augmented product. Every product is backed up by a host 
of supporting services. Often, the buyer expects these services and would reject the core- 
tangible product if they were not available. Examples would be restrooms and escala- 
tors/elevators in the case of a department store, and warranties and return policies in the 
case of a lawn mower. Dow Chemical has earned a reputation as a company that will bend 
over backwards in order to service an account. It means that a Dow sales representative 
will visit a troubled farmer after-hours in order to solve a serious problem. This extra serv- 
ice is an integral part of the augmented product and a key to their success, in a world with 
many strong competitors and few unique products, the role of the augmented product is 
clearly increasing. 



154 CHAFTER7 INTRODUCING AND MANAGINGTHE PRODUCT 



LEVELS OFTHE PRODUCT 

PROMISED PRODUCT 



V?LU D E S TRADE " IN 

INSTALLATION -- -AUGMENTED PRODUCT 



\ 



DEUVERY / PACKAGING FEATURES mTANGIBLE pRODUC T 

\ 

BRAND / CORE A" \~ CORE PRODUCT 

NAME BENEFIT/ 

\ SERVICE 

■■■.:' \ 

QUALITY STYLING 

AFTER-SALE 
WARRANTY SERVICE 



STATUS DEPENDABILITY 



FIGURE 7.1 Levels of the product 



The outer ring of the product is referred to as the promised product. Every product 
has an implied promise. An implied promise is a characteristic that is attached to the prod- 
uct over time. The car industry rates brands by their trade-in value. There is no definite prom- 
ise that a Mercedes-Benz holds its value better than a BMW. There will always be exceptions. 
How many parents have installed a swimming pool based on the implied promise that their 
two teenagers will stay home more, or that they will entertain friends more often. 

Having discussed the components of a product, it is now relevant to examine ways 
of classifying products in order to facilitate the design of appropriate product strategies. 



CLASSIFICATION OF PRODUCTS 



It should be apparent that the process of developing successful marketing programs for indi- 
vidual products is extremely difficult. In response to this difficulty, a variety of classifica- 
tion systems have evolved that, hopefully, suggest appropriate strategies. The two most 
common classifications are: (I) consumer goods versus industrial goods, and (2) goods prod- 
ucts (i.e. durables and nondurables) versus service products. 



CLASSIFICATION OF PRODUCTS 1 55 

Consumer Goods and Industrial Goods 

The traditional classification of products is to dichotomize all products as being either con- 
sumer goods or industrial goods. When we purchase products for our own consumption or 
that of our family with no intention of selling these products to others, we are referring to 
consumer goods. Conversely, industrial goods are purchased by an individual or organiza- 
tion in order to modify them or simply distribute them to the ultimate consumer in order 
to make a profit or meet some other objective. 

Classification of Consumer Goods 

A classification iong used in marketing separates products targeted at consumers into three 
groups: convenience, shopping, and specialty, i A convenience good is one that requires a 
minimum amount of effort on the part of the consumer. Extensive distribution is the pri- 
mary marketing strategy. The product must be available in every conceivable outlet and must 
be easily accessible in these outlets . Vending machines typically dispense convenience goods, 
as do automatic teller machines. These products are usually of low unit value, they are highly 
standardized, and frequently they are nationally advertised. Yet, the key is to convince resellers, 
i.e., wholesalers and retailers, to carry the product. If the product is not available when, 
where, and in a form desirable by the consumer, the convenience product will fail. 

From the consumer's perspective, little time, planning, or effort go into buying con- 
venience goods. Consequently, marketers must establish a high level of brand awareness 
and recognition. This is accomplished through extensive mass advertising, sales promotion 
devices such as coupons and point-of-purchase displays, and effective packaging. The fact 
that many of our product purchases are often on impulse is evidence that these strategies 
work. Availability is also important. Consumers have come to expect a wide spectrum of 
products to be conveniently located at their local supermarkets, ranging from packaged goods 
used daily, e.g., bread and soft drinks, to products purchased rarely or in an emergency such 
as snow shovels, carpet cleaners, and flowers. 

In contrast, consumers want to be able to compare products categorized as shopping 
goods. Automobiles, appliances, furniture, and homes are in this group. Shoppers are will- 
ing to go to some lengths to compare values, and therefore these goods need not be dis- 
tributed so widely. Although many shopping goods are nationally advertised, often it is the 
ability of the retailer to differentiate itself that creates the sale. The differentiation could be 
equated with a strong brand name, such as Sears Roebuck or Marshall Field; effective mer- 
chandising; aggressive personal selling; or the availability of credit. Discounting, or pro- 
motional price-cutting, is a characteristic of many shopping goods because of retailers' desire 
to provide attractive shopping values. In the end, product turn-over is slower and retailers 
have a great deal of their capital tied-up in inventory. This combined with the necessity to 
price discount and provide exceptional service means that retailers expect strong support 
from manufacturers with shopping goods. 

Specialty goods represent the third product classification. From the consumer's per- 
spective, these products are so unique that they will go to any lengths to seek out and pur- 
chase them. Almost without exception, price is not a principle factor affecting the sales of 
specialty goods. Although these products may be custom-made (e.g., a hairpiece) or one- 
of-a-kind (e.g. , a statue), it is also possible that the marketer has been very successful in 
differentiating the product in the mind of the consumer. Crisco shortening, for instance, may 
be considered to be a unique product in the mind of a consumer and the consumer would 
pay any price for it. Such a consumer would not accept a substitute and would be willing 
to go to another store or put off their pie baking until the product arrives. Another exam- 
ple might be the strong attachment some people feel toward a particular hair stylist or bar- 
ber. A person may wait a long time for that individual and might even move with that person 



1 56 CHAPTER 7 INTRODUCING AND.MANAG1NGTHE PRODUCT 



to another hair salon. It is generally desirable for a marketer to lift her product from the 
shopping to the specialty class (and keep it there), With the exception of price-cutting, the 
entire range of marketing activities are required to accomplish this goal. 

Classification of Industrial Goods 

Consumer goods are characterized as products that are aimed at and purchased by the ulti- 
mate consumer. 2 Although consumer prod'lcts are more familiar to most readers, industrial 
goods represent a very important product category, and in the case of some manufacturers, 
they are the only product sold. The meibods of industrial marketing are somewhat more 
specialized, but in general the concepts presented in this text are valid for the industrial 
marketer as well as for the consumer goods marketer. 

Industrial products can either be categorized from the perspective of the producer and 
how they shop for the product, or the perspective of the manufacturer and how they are 
produced and how much they cost. The latter criteria offers a more insightful classification 
for industrial products. 

Fanns, forests, mines, and quarries provide extractive products to producers. Although 
there are some farm products that are ready for consumption when they leave the farm, most 
farm and other extractive products require some processing before ourchase by the con- 
sumer. A useful way to divide extractive products is into farm products and natural prod- 
ucts, since they are marketed in slightly different ways. 

Manufactured products are those that have undergone some processing. The demands 
for manufactured industrial goods are usually derived from the demands for ultimate con- 
sumer goods. There are a number of specific types of manufactured industrial goods. 

Semi-manufactured goods are raw materials that have received some processing but 
require some more before they are useful to the purchaser. Lumber and crude oil are exam- 
ples of these types of products. Since these products tend to be standardized, there is a strong 
emphasis on price and vendor reliability. 

Parts are manufactured items that are ready to be incorporated into other products, 
For instance, the motors that go into lawn mowers and steering wheels on new cars are care- 
fully assembled when they arrive at the manufacturing plant. Since products such as these 
are usually ordered well in advance and in large quantities, price and service are the two 
most important marketing considerations. 

Process machinery (sometimes called "installations") refers to major pieces of equip- 
ment used in the manufacture of other goods. This category would include tne physical plant 
(boilers, lathes, blast furnaces, elevators, and conveyor systems), The marketing process 
would incorporate the efforts of a professional sales force, supported by engineers and tech- 
nicians, and a tremendous amount of personalized service. 

Equipment is made up of portable factory equipment (e.g., fork ;ift trucks, fire extin- 
guisher) and office equipment (e.g., computers, copier machines). Although these products 
do not contribute directly to the physical product, they do aid in the production process. 
These products may be sold directly from the manufacturer to the user, or a middleman 
can be used in geographically dispersed markets. The marketing strategy employs a wide 
range of activities, including product quality and features, price, service, vendor deals, and 
promotion, 

Supplies and service do not enter the finished product at all, but are nevertheless con- 
sumed in conjunction with making the product. Supplies would include paper, pencils, fuel 
oil, brooms, soap, and so forth. These products are normally purchased as convenience prod- 
ucts with a minimum of effort and evaluation. Business services include maintenance (e,g., 
office cleaning), repairs (e.g. plumbing), and advisory (e.g. legal). Because the need for serv- 
ices tends to be unpredictable, they are often contracted for a relatively long period of time, 



CLASSIFICATION OF PRODUCTS 



157 



Goods Versus Services 

Suggesting that there are substantial differences between goods products and service prod- 
ucts has been the source of great debate in marketing. Opponents of the division propose 
that "products are jjroducts, " and just because there are some characteristics associated with 
service products and not goods products and vice-versa, does not mean customized strate- 
gies are generally necessary for each. Advocates provide evidence that these differences 
are significant. It is the position in this book that service products are different than goods 
products, and that service products represent an immense market sector. 

Service products are reflected by a wide variety of industries: utilities, barbers, travel 
agencies, health spas, consulting firms, medical care and banking, to name but a few, and 
they account for nearly 50% of tne average consumer's total expenditures, 70% of the jobs, 
and two-thirds of the G.N.P. Clearly, the service sector is large and is growing. While all 
products share certain common facets, service products tend to differ from goods products 
in a number of ways 

Characteristics of Service Products 

Like goods products, service products are quite heterogeneous. Nevertheless, there are sev- 
eral characteristics that are generalized to service products. 

Intangible As noted by Berry, "a good is an object, a device, a thing; a service is 
a deed, a performance, an effort." With the purchase of a good you have something that 
can be seen, touched, tasted, worn or displayed; this is not true with a service. Although 
you pay your money and consume the service, there is nothing tangible to show for it. For 
example, if you attend a professional football game, you spend $ 19.50 for a ticket and spend 
nearly three hours taking in the entertainment. 




bToqt-T U(h 

ZfiTOf) 



AD 7.1 Shoes are a traditional goods product. 



158 CHAPTER 7 INTRODUCING AND MANAGING THE PRODUCT 



Simultaneous Production and Consumption Service products are characterized as 
those that are being consumed at the same time they are being produced. The tourist attrac- 
tion is producing entertainment or pleasure at the same time it is being consumed. In con- 
trast, goods products are produced, stored, and then consumed. A result of this characteristic 
is that the provider of the service is often present when consumption takes place. Dentists, 
doctors, hair stylists, and ballet dancers are all present when the product is used. 

Little Standardization Because service products are so closely related to the peo- 
ple providing the service, ensuring the same level of satisfaction from time to time is quite 
difficult. Dentists have their bad days, not every baseball game is exciting, and the second 
vacation to Disney World may nol be as wonderful as the first. 

High Buyer Involvement With many service products, the purchaser may provide 
a great deal of inout into the final form of the product. For example, if you wanted to take 
a Caribbean cruise., a good travel agent would give you a large selection of brochures and 
pamphlets describing the various cruise locations, options provided in terms of cabin loca- 
tion and size, islands visited, food, entertainment, prices, and whether they are set up for 
children. Although the task may be quite arduous, an individual can literally design every 
moment of the vacation. 

It should be noted thai these four characteristics associated with service products vary 
in intensity from product to product. In fact, service products are best viewed as being on 
a continuum in respect to these four characteristics. (See Figure 7.2.) 

The point of this disclaimer is to suggest: (1) that service products on the right side 
of the continuum--e.g., high intangibility-are different from good products on the left side 
of the continuum, (2) that most marketing has traditionally taken place on the left side, and 
(3) service products tend to require certain adjustments in their marketing strategy because 
of these differences. 



CHARACTERISTICS THAT DISTINGUISH GOODS FROM SERVICES 

Pure Pure 

Goods Services 

U--H--H _, 1 I 

Salt VCR Auto Fast Food Customer Airlines Teaching Investment 

Restaurant Clothes Advice 

Tangible ^ J» Intangible 

Low Customer *■ High Customer 

Involvement Involvement 

Low Quality g £ High Quality 

Control Problems Control Problems 

Easy to Evaluate 4 <t Hard to Evaluate 

Inventories 4 * No Inventories 

No Time Criteria 4 i Strict Time Criteria 

Low Importance of < S? High Importance of 

Contact Points Contact Points 

FIGURE 7.2 Characteristics that distinguish goods from services 



PRODUCT PLANNING AND STRATEGY FORMULATION 1 59 

While this discussion implies that service products are marketed differently than goods 
products, it is important to remember that all products, whether they are goods, services, 
blankets, diapers, or plate glass, possess peculiarities that require adjustments in the mar- 
keting effort. However, "pure" goods products and "pure" service products (i.e., those on 
the extreme ends of the continuum) tend to reflect characteristics and responses from cus- 
tomers that suggcSt opposite marketing strategies. Admittedly, offering an exceptional prod- 
uct at the right price, through the most accessible channels, promoted extensively and 
accurately, should work for any type of product. The goods/services classification provides 
the same useful insights provided by the consumer/industrial classification discussed earlier. 

PRODUCT PLANNING AND STRATEGY FORMULATION 

The ultimate purpose of this chapter is to introduce the idea that products are planned, and 
that a whole series of decisions go into this planning process-from the moment the prod- 
uct idea is first conceptualized to the day it is finally deleted. The particular label placed 
on the company's plan for marketing its product is the product strategy. It is part of the 
marketing strategy and should harmonize with it. Like the marketing Strategy, it contains 
three important elements. (1) the determination of product objectives, (2) the development 
of product plans that will help reach product objectives, and (3) the development of strate- 
gies appropriate for the introduction and management of products . 

The Determination of Product Objectives 

There are a great many objectives that relate to the product management effort. Rather then 
attempting to provide a complete list, a discussion of the most common product objectives 
will provide an adequate illustration. 4 

It is safe to conclude that a universal objective is growth in sales as a result of the 
introduction of a new product or the improvement of an existing product. Certainly, there 
is little need to engage in either product activity unless this objective is present. 

An objective related to growth in sales is finding new uses for established products . 
Since this process is generally easier than developing new products, the search for new uses 
of older products goes on endlessly. For example, Texas Instruments has found numerous 
uses for their basic product, the semiconductor. 

Using excess capacity is another commonly stated product objective. This objective 
is prompted by the rapid turnover of products and the resulting changes in market share. 
Of course, such utilization is always a short-run consideration. In the long ran, only those 
products that can generate a continuing level of profitability should be retained, regardless 
of the problem of excess capacity. 

Maintaining or improving market share may also be an objective shared by many com- 
panies. In such cases, the emphasis of the firm is on their competitive position rather than 
attaining a target level of profits. Creating product differentiation is often the primary strat- 
egy employed to reach this objective. 

Developing a full line ofproducts is another typical objective. A company with a par- 
tial product line may well consider the objective of rounding out its product offerings. Often, 
the sales force provides the impetus for this objective in that they may need a more com- 
plete product line to offer their custorrers, or the resellers themselves may request a greater 
assortment. 

Expanding a product's appeal to new market segments is a common objective. John 
Deere is attempting to increase its small share of the consumer power products market by 



160 



CHAPTER 7 INTRODUCING AND MANAGING THE PRODUCT 



aiming at suburbanites and women farmers. They have introduced a series of redesigned 
lawn and garden tractors, tillers, and snow blowers that are easier for women to operate. 

Although this represents a limited selection of objectives, it does suggest that there 
must be a reason for all product-related activities. These reasons are best expressed in the 
form of specific objectives. 

The Product Plan 

Once a marketer has determined a set of product objectives, it is then possible to initiate 
the activities that constitute the product plan. Although there are a number of ways to look 
at this process, we have elected to explain this process through the product lifecycle con- 
cept (PLC). It should be noted that the value of the PLC framework as a planning tool lies 
at the industry and/or product category level. 

The Product Lifecycle 

A company has to be good at both developing new products and managing them in the face 
of changing tastes, technologies, and competition. Evidence suggests that every product goes 
through a lifecycle with predictable sales and profits, as illustrated in Figure 7.3. As such, 
the manager must find new products to replace those that are in the declining stage of the 
product lifecycle and learn how to manage products optimally as they move from one stage 
to the next. 

The five stages of the PLC and their components can be defined as follows: 

1 . Product development: the period during which new product ideas are generated, 
operationalized, and tested prior to commercialization. 

2. Introduction: the period during which a new product is introduced. Initial distri- 
bution is obtained and promotion is obtained. 

3. Growth: the period during which the product is accepted by consumers and the 
trade. Initial distribution is expanded, promotion is increased, repeat orders from 
initial buyers are obtained, and word-of-mouth advertising leads to more and more 
new users. 



SALES/PROFITS 




SALES 



PRODUCT 

DEVELOPMENT 

STAGE 



MATURITY DECLINE 

TIME 



PROFITS 



TIME 



FIGURE 1.3 The product lifecycle 



PRODUCT PLANNING AND STRATEGY FORMULATION 161 

4. Maturity: the period during which competition becomes serious . Towards the end 
of this period, competitors' products cut deeply into the company's market position. 

5. Decline: the product becomes obsolete and its competitive disadvantage result in 
decline in sales and, eventually, deletion. 

It should be noted that the predictive capabilities of the product lifecycle are depend- 
ent upon several factors, both controllable and uncontrollable, and that no two companies 
may follow the same exact pattern or produce the same results. For example, differences 
in the competitive situation during each of these stages may dictate different marketing 
approaches. Some argue that the competitive situation is the single most important factor 
influencing the duration of height of a product lifecycle curve. A useful way of looking at 
this phenomenon is in the telms of competitive distinctiveness. Several years ago, Dean Sug- 
gested that a separation exists between products of lasting and perishable distinctiveness. 
Often, new products may, upon introduction, realistically expect a long period of lasting 
distinctiveness or market protection-through such factors as secrecy, patent protection, and 
the time and cash required to develop competitive products. However, almost all new prod- 
ucts can exoect fewer than 5, 10, or 15 years of market protection. 8 

Of course, changes in other elements of the marketing mix may also affect the per- 
formance of the product during its lifecycle. For example, a vigorous promotional program 
or a dramatic lowering of price may improve the sales picture in the decline period, at least 
temporarily. The black-and-white TV market illustrated this point. Usually the improve- 
ments brought about by nonproduct tactics are relatively short-lived and basic alterations 
to product offerings provide longer benefits. 

Whether one accepts the S-shaped curve as a valid product-sales pattern or as a pat- 
tern that holds only for some products (but not for others), the product lifecycle concept 
can still be very useful. It offers a framework for dealing systematically with product man- 
agement issues and activities. Thus, the marketer must be cognizant of the generalizations 
that apply to a given product as it moves through the various stages. This process begins 
with product development and ends with the deletion (discontinuation) of the product. 

Product Strategies 

Product planning should be an ongoing process that consistently evaluates existing prod- 
ucts, modifies where necessa;:y, deletes products that no longer contribute to the firm, and 
introduces new products. Since most companies have at least one product line (and per- 
haps several), each containing several items, product management is a necessary activity - 
a daily activity. The task involves gathering the necessary data, utilizing a framework to 
evaluate it in light of a particular product or groups of products, selecting an appropriate 
strategy, and implementing that strategy. In general, there are two product strategy issues: 
approaches to the market and key product decisions. 

Approaches to the Market 

The primary task of a product is to facilitate the success of a particular market strategy. A 
market strategy delineates what the seller wants to accomplish relative to buyers. Strategy 
is partly based on the approach used to represent the product. There are three general 
approaches, each of which may change during the life of the product. 

Produci differentiation is used when a marketer chooses to appeal to the whole mar- 
ket by attempting to cater to the particular desires of all the buyers who hopefully would 
prefer his brand . This strategy is appropriate if the brand is widely popular and can be con- 
tinued in general market leadership through strong promotion. Crest toothpaste is an example 



162 CHAPTER 7 INTRODUCING AND MANAGING THE PRODUCT 



of a product that has successfully engaged in this strategy. Minor taste changes and for- 
mula changes have differentiated a basic product in the minds of many Crest users. 

Market extension is a second approach available to the product manager. This entails 
attracting additional types of buyers into the market or discovering and promoting new uses 
of the product. Sometimes the addition of new buyers itself provides new uses for the prod- 
uct. 3M's Scotch tape, for example, expanded its uses when it became popular with the gen- 
eral consumer as well as the business consumer. Unfortunately, market extension strategies 
are extremely easy for competitors to copy. Thus, the brand promoting the new use is ben- 
efiting competitors as well. 

Market segmentation is the final approach. As discussed in an earlier chapter, seg- 
mentation is identifying a group of consumers that tend to respond to some aspect of the 
market mix in a similar way. Rather than trying to appeal to the whole market, you con- 
centrate your efforts and resources on apart of that market. The trend towards segmenting 
markets occurs most among branded goods. Even industrial products, such as the many vari- 
eties of diesel trucks, is an industry in which small firms survive by concentrating on some 
special segment of that heterogeneous total market. A company like Coca-Cola found that 
there were pockets of consumers that, for various reasons, did not purchase Coke. Through 
the introduction of Tab many years ago, followed by Diet Coke and Caffeine-Free Coke, 
they feel that most of the market is now covered. 



Key Product Management Decisions 

With every product, regardless of where it is in its lifecycle, there are certain key decisions 
that must be made, perhaps repeatedly. These decisions include specifying product features, 
package design, branding decisions, establishing related services, and legal considerations. 
Although these decision areas are discussed separately, it should be noted that they all inter- 
act with one another, and are monitored and modified when necessary, throughout the life 
of the product. 

Product Features In a functional sense, the key question is, "Does the product do 
what the consumer wants it to do?" Does it get clothes clean? Does it quench your thirst? 
Does it save you money? Some of these questions can be answered only through product 
research, but consumer research provides more answers. 

While the development of ultra-high-speed photographic film was a research break- 
through, how the consumer perceives this benefit can be answered only by the consumer. 
Tt is possible that the product benefit is so great that it overwhelms the consumer or it is 
not believed by the consumer. Several new toothpaste manufacturers have recently come 
out with products that partially restore decayed tooth areas. They have intentionaiiy kept 
this innovation very Jow-key, because they feared the consumer would not believe it. 

Product features include such factors as form, color, si.7X, weight, odor, material, and 
tactile qualities. A new car can offer thousands of alternatives when one considers the exte- 
rior and interior options. The smell of fresh bakery products or a good Italian restaurant 
has clearly enticed many a customer. The product must also be aesthetically pleasing . When 
the entire product is put together, it must create an appealing, visually attractive and dis- 
tinctive need satisfier. 

Packaging With the increased importance placed on self-service marketing, the 
role of packaging is becoming quite significant. For example, in a typical supermarket a 
shopper passes about 600 items per minute, or one item every tenth of a second. Thus, the 
only way to get some consumers to notice the product is through displays, shelf-hangers, 
tear-off coupon blocks, other point-of-purchase devices, and, last but not least, effective pack- 



PRODUCT PLANNING AND STRATEGY FORMULATION 1 63 

ages. Common uses of packaging include protection , containment, communication, and util- 
ity/ease of use. 6 

Considering the importance placed on the package, it is not surprising that a great 
deal of research is spent on motivational research, color testing, psychological manipula- 
tion, and so forth, in order to ascertain how the majority of consumers will react to a new 
package. Based on the results of this research, past experience, and the current and antic- 
ipated decisions of competitors, the marketer will initially determine the primary role of 
the package relative to the product. Should it include quality, safety, distinction, affordability, 
convenience, or aesthetic beauty? For the automobile oil industry, the package has become 
more important to promote than product performance. To a lesser extent, this is also true 
for products such as powdered drinkf., margarine, soft drinks, perfrmes, and pet foods. In 
the case of Pringles, Procter & Gamble had to design a package that wouid protect a very 
delicate product. It also faced the uncertain response of retailers whc have never stocked 
stacked potato chips before. Recall the many shapes and sizes ketchup containers have taken 
during the last twenty years. 

Clearly delineating the role of the product should lead to the actual design of the pack- 
age: its color, size, texture, location of trademark, name, product information, and promo- 
tional materials. Market leaders in the dry food area, such as cake mixes, have established 
a tradition of recipes on the package. However, there are other package-related questions. 
Do the colors compliment one another? Are you taking advantage of consumer confusion 
by using a package design similar to that of the market leader? Can the product be made 
for an acceptable cost? Can it be transported, slored, and shelved properly? Is there space 
for special promotional deals? Finally, various versions of the product will be tested in the 
market. How recognizable is the package? Is it distinctive? Aesthetically pleasing? Accept- 
able by dealers? 

Branding Any brand name, symbol, design, or combination of these constitutes a 
branding strategy. The primary function of the brand is to identify the product and to dis- 
tinguish it from those of competitors. In addition, from the perspective of the buyer, it may 
simply be consistent quality or satisfacLion, enhance shopping efficiency, or call attention 
to new products. For the seller, selecting a brand name is one of the key new product deci- 
sions, and reflects the overall position and marketing program desired by the finn. It is through 
a brand name that a product can: ( 1) be meaningfully advertising and distinguished fron: 
substitutes, (2) make it easier for the customer to track down products, and (3) be given 
legal protection. Also, branding often provides an interesting carryover effect: satisfied cus- 
tomers will associate quality products with an established brand name. 

Before going any further it is necessary to distinguish several terms: 

« Brand: a name, term, sign, symbol, design, or a combination of these that is intended 
to identify the goods or services of one seller or group of sellers and to differenti- 
ate them from those of competitors . 

• Brand names: that part of a brand which can be vocalized-the utterable. 

• Brand mark: that part of a brand which can be recognized but is not utterable, such 
as a symbol, design, or distinctive coloring or lettering. 

• Trademark: a brand or part of a brand that is given legal protection because it is 
capable of exclusive appropriation 7 

As was the case with product design and packaging decisions, branding requires a 
systematic effort at generating aiternative brand names, screening them, and selecting the 
best alternative. However, before this process begms, a more basic decision must be made. 
What is the basic branding strategy to be employed? Three viable options are available. 



164 CHAPTER 7 INTRODUCING AND MANAGING THE PRODUCT 



First, a strict manufacturer's branding policy can be followed. This would mean that 
the producer refuses to manufacture merchandise under brands other than his own, although 
he may sell seconds or irregulars on an unbranded basis. 

Second, an exclusive distributors brands policy could be followed. In this case, the 
producer does not have a brand of his own but agrees to sell his products only to a partic- 
ular distributor and carry his brand name (private brands). 

The final opinion is a mixed brand policy, which includes elements of both extremes 
and leads to the production of manufacturer's as well as distributor's brands. For example, 
Firestone sells some tires under their own brand names and some under private labels. 

For most companies, both brand names and trademarks are vital in the identifica- 
tion of products. The design process should be guided by research; often the advertising 
agency is brought in to help. Brand names are mandatory if the manufacturer or distrib- 
utor intends to use mass advertising. Brand names also make word-of-mouth advertising 
effective. Without them, repeat purchases of a particular product would be virtually impos- 
sible. Product identification through the brand name is a most important element in the 
product plan. 

Related Services Behind every product is a series of supporting services, such as 
warranties and money-back guarantees. In many instances, such services may be as impor- 
tant as the product itseif. In fact, at times it is difficult to separate the associated services 
from the product features. Consequently, companies must constantly monitor the services 
offered by the company and its competitors. 

Based on the results of data-gathering devices such as customer surveys, consumer 
corrplaints, and suggestion boxes, the product manager can determine the types of serv- 
ices to offer, the form the service will take, and the price charged. For example, consumers 
are very reluctant to purchase a stereo that can be serviced only by sending it to the fac- 
tory, and paying the postage and a high service fee. Maytag, however, has been very effec- 
tive in selling their appliances with service contracts and local repair. Banks are still uncertain 
as to whether they should charge the customer for checks, ATM use, safety deposit boxes, 
and overdrafts. An industrial customer might be keenly interested in related services such 
as prompt delivery, reliable price quotations, credit, test facilities, demonstration capabili- 
ties, liberal return policies, engineering expetlise, and so forth. 

Although there are a wide range of supportive services, the following are most prevalent: 

1. Credit andfinancing. With the increased acceptance of debt by the consumer, offer- 
ing credit and/or financing has become an important part of the total product. For 
certain market segments and certain products, the availability of credit may make 
the difference between buying or not buying the product. 

2. Warranty. There are several types of durable products, retail stores, and even serv- 
ice products where warranties are expected. These warranties can provide a wide 
array of restitution, with a very lim ited warranty at one end of the continuum and 
extended warranties at the other. An example of the former is a VCR manufac- 
turer that provides a 3D-day wananty on the motor drive and no other coverage. 
The Craftsman tools division of Sears Roebuck reflects the other extreme. A bro- 
ken shovel will be replaced, no questions asked, after a full summer of use. A good 
jewelry store has a warranty backing up every diamond ring they sell. 

3. Money-back guarantees. The ultimate warranty is the money-back guarantee. To 
the customer, a money-back guarantee reduces risk almost totally. There are cer- 
tain market segments (e.g., low risk takers) that perceive this service as very impor- 
tant. Jt is obvious that this service is effective only if the product is superior and 



PRODUCT PLANNING AND STRATEGY FORMULATION 165 

the product will be returned by only a few people. Extensive research should sup- 
port this decision. 

4. Delivery, installation, training, and service. Products that tend to be physically 
cumbersome or located far from the customer might consider delivery (free or a 
small charge) to be an integral part of the new product. Very few major appliance 
stores, lumberyards, or furniture stores could survive without provisions for this 
service. Similarly, there are products that are quite complicated and/or very tech- 
nical, and whose average consumer could neither learn how to install or use it wiLh- 
out assistance from the manufacturer. Both professional and home computer 
companies have been forced to provide such services. The slow development of 
v;deo products or product types that have a history of breakdown and extensive 
maintenance must offer this service to the customer. I n addition, it must be pro- 
vided quickly and effectively. Although product service and maintenance has been 
provided to industrial customers for several years, this service is stiP new to many 
customer product manufacturers. 



Product Mix Strategies As more brands enter the market place and lock into a par- 
ticular share of the market, it becomes more difficult to win and hold buyers. Other changes 
that occur are: (1) changes in consumer tastes and in particular, the size and characteris- 
tics of particular market segments, (2) changes in availability or cost of raw materials and 
other production or marketing components; and (3) the proliferation of small-share brands 
that reduce efficiencies in production, marketing, and servicing for existing brands. Because 
of factors such af: these, a decision is made either to identify ways of changing the prod- 
uct to further distinguish it from otners, or to design a strategy that will eliminate the prod- 
uct and make way for new products. The specific s,rategy to accomplish these aims may 
be in several general categor'es. 

Product modification: It is normal for a product to be changed several times during 
its life. Certainly, a product should be equal or superior to those of principal competitors 
I f a change can provide superior satisfaction and win more initial buyers and switchers from 
other brands, then a change is probably warranted. 

'let the decision should not be approached in a haphazard manner. There are definite 
risks. For example, a dramatic increase in product quality might price the existing target 
consumer out of the market, or it might cause him/her to perceive the product as being too 
good. Similarly, the removal of a particular ?roduct feature might be the one characteris- 
tic of the product considered most important by a market segment. A key question the mar- 
keter must answer before modifying the product is what particular attributes of the product 
and competing products are perceived as most important by the consumer. Factors such as 
quality, fu'letions, price, services, design, packaging, and warranty may all be determinants. 

This evaluative process requires the product manager to arrange for marketing research 
studies to learn of improvements buyers might want, evaluate the market reception given 
to the competitors' improvements., and evaluate improvements that have been developed 
within the company. Also required is a relationship with the product research and devel- 
opment (R&D) department. Ideally, R&D should be able to respond quickly to the mar- 
keting department's request for product upgrading and should maintain ongoing programs 
of product improvement and cost reduction. Even suppliers and distributors should be encour- 
aged to submit suggestions. 

Product positioning is a strategic management decision that determines the place a 
product should occupy in a given market-its market niche. Given this context, the word 
"positioning" includes several of the common meanings of position: a place (what place 



166 CHAPTER 7 INTRODUCING AND MANAGING THE PRODUCT 



does the product occupy in its market?) , a rank (how does the product fare against its com- 
petitors in various evaluative dimensions?), a mental attitude (what are consumer attitudes?), 
and a strategic process (what activities must be attempted in order to create the optimal 
product position?). Thus, positioning is both a concept and a process. The positioning process 
produces a position for the product, just as the segmentation process produces alternative 
market segments. Positioning can be applied to any type of product at any stage of the life- 
cycle. Approaches to positioning range from gathering sophisticated market research infor- 
mation on consumers' preferences and perceptions of brands to the intuition of the product 
manager or a member of his staff. 

Aaker and Shansby suggest several positioning strategies employed by marketers. A 
product or idea can be positioned 8 

1. By attributes- Crest is a cavity fighter 

2. By price-Sears is the "value" store 

3. By competitors-Avis positions itself against Hertz 

4. By application— Gatorade is for after exercising 

5. By product user- Miller is for the blue-collar, heavy beer drinker 

6. By product class- Carnation Instant Breakfast is a breakfast food 

7. By services provided-Circuit City backs up all its products 

Products and brands are constantly being repositioned as a result of changes in com- 
petitive and market situations. Repositioning involves changing the market's perceptions 
of a product or brand so that the product or brand can compete more effectively in its pres- 
ent market or in other market segments. Changing market perceptions may require changes 
in the tangible product or in its selling price. Often, however, the new differentiation is accom- 
plished through a change in the promotional message. To evaluate the position and to gen- 
erate diagnostic information about the future positioning strategies, it is necessary to monitor 
the position over time. A product position, like sports heroes, may change readily; keep- 
ing track and making necessary adjustments is very important. 

Product Line Decisions A product line can contain one product or hundreds . The 
number of products in a product line refer to its depth, while the number of separate prod- 
uct lines owned by a company is the product line width. Several decisions are related to 
the product line. 

There are two basic strategies that deal with whether the company will attempt to 
carry every conceivable product needed and wanted by the consumer or whether they will 
carry selected items. The former is afull-line strategy while the latter is called a limited- 
line strategy. Few full-line manufacturers attempt to provide items for every conceivable 
market niche. And few limited-line manufacturers would refuse to add an item if the demand 
were great enough. Each strategy has its advantages and disadvantages. 

Line extensions strategies involve adding goods related to the initial product, whose 
purchase or use is keyed to the product. For example, a computer company may provide 
an extensive selection of software to be used with its primary hardware. This strategy not 
only increases sales volume, it also strengthens the manufacturer's name association with 
the owner of the basic equipment, and offers dealers a broader line. These added items tend 
to be similar to existing brands with no innovations. They also have certain risks. Often the 
company may not have a high level of expeltise either producing or marketing these related 
products. Excessive costs, inferior products, and the Ions of goodwill with distributors and 
customers are all possible deleterious outcomes. There is also a strong possibility that such 



PRODUCT PLANNING AND STRATEGY FORMULATION 167 

a product decision could create conflict within the channel of distribution. In the computer 
example just described, this company may have entered the software business over the strong 
objection of their long-telm supplier of software. If their venture into the software busi- 
ness fails, re-establishing a positive relationship with this supplier could be quite difficult. 

A line extension strategy should only be considered when the producer is certain that 
the capability exists to efficiently manufacture a product that compares well with the base 
product. The producer should also be sure of profitable competition in this new market. 

Line-filling strategies occur when a void in the existing product line has not been filled 
or a new void has developed due to the activities of competitors or the request of consumers. 
Before considering such a strategy several key questions should be answered: 

• Can the new product support itself? 

• Will it cannibalize existing products? 

• Will existing outlets be willing to stock it? 

• Will competitors fill the gap if we don't? 

• What will happen if we don't act? 

Assuming that we decide to fill out our product line further, there are several ways 
of implementing this decision. Three are most common: 

1. Product proliferation' the introduction of new varieties of the initial product or 
products that are similar (e.g. , a ketchup manufacturer introduces hickory-flavored 
and pizza-flavored barbecue sauces and a special hot dog sauce). 

2. Brand extension: strong brand preference allows the company to introduce the 
related product under the brand umbrella (e.g., Jell-0 introduces pie filling and 
diet desserts under the Jell-0 brand name). 

3. Private branding: producing and distributing a related product under the brand 
of a distributor or other producers (e.g., Firestone producing a less expensive tire 
for K-Mart). 

In addition to the demand of consumers or pressures from competitors, there are other 
legitimate reasons to engage in these tactics. First, the additional products may have a greater 
appeal and serve a greater customer base than did the original product. Second, the addi- 
tional product or brand can create excitement both for the manufacturer and distributor. Third, 
shelf space taken by the new product means it cannot be used by competitors . Finally, the 
danger of the original product becoming outmoded is hedged. Yet, there is serious risk that 
must be considered as well: unless there are markets for the proliferations that will expand 
the brand's share, the newer forms will cannibalize the original product and depress profits. 

Line-pruning strategies involve the process of getting rid of products that no longer 
contribute to company profits. A simple fact of marketing is that sooner or later a product 
will decline in demand and require pruning. Timex has stopped selling home computers. 
Hallmark has stopped seiling talking cards. 

A great many of the components used in the latest automobile have replaced far more 
expensive parts, due to the increased costs in other areas of the process, e.g., labor costs. 
Using modern robotics technology has halved the manufacturing costs of several prod- 
ucts. Through such implementation, Keebler Cookies moved from packaging their cook- 
ies totally by hand to 70% automation. Other possible ways a company might become more 
efficient are by replacing antiquated machinery, moving production closer to the point of 
sale, subcontracting out part of the manufacturing process, or hiring more productive 
employees. 



168 CHAPTER 7 INTRODUCING AND MANAGING THE PRODUCT 



Product Deletion Eventually a product reaches the end of its life. This is the least 
understood stage of product management, because we human beings are very reluctant to 
think about death, even that of a product. 

There are several reasons for deleting a mature product. First, when a product is los- 
ing money, it is a prime deletion candidate. In regard to this indication, it is important to 
make sure that the loss is truly attributable to the product and not just a quirk in the com- 
pany's accounting system. 

Second, there are times when a company with a long product line can benefit if the 
weakest of these products are dropped. This thinning of the line is referred to as product- 
line simplification. Product overpopulation spreads a company's productive, financial, and 
marketing resources very thin. Moreover, an excess of products in the line, some of which 
serve overlapping markets, not only creates internal competition among the company's own 
products, but also creates confusion in the minds of consumers. Consequently, a company 
may apply several criteria to all its products and delete those that fare worst. 

A third reason for deleting a product is that problem products absorb too much man- 
agement attention. Many of the costs inculTed by weak products are indirect: management 
time, inventory costs, promotion expenses, decline of company reputation, and so forth. 

Missed opportunity costs reflect the final reason for product deletion. Even if a mature 
product is making a profit contribution and its indirect cost consequences are recognized 
and considered justifiable, the company might still be better off 'vithout the product because 
of its opportunity cost. The opportunity cost of a mature product is the profit contribution 
that a new and healthy product could produce if the effort and resources being devoted to 
the mature item were redirected. 

The final issue is actually going through a product deletion procedure. Sometimes, 
however, a product can be revived (see the next Integrated Marketing box). 

Strategies for Developing New Products 

For several decades, business has come increasingly to the realization that new and improved 
products may hold the key to their survival and ultimate success. Consequently, professional 
management has become an integral part of this process. As a result, many firms develop 
new products based on an orderly procedure, employing comprehensive and relevant data, 
and intelligent decision making. 9 



1. A product is anything, either tangible or intangible, offered 4. Service products, in contrast to goods product!;, are char- 
by the firm as a solution to the needs and wants of the con- acterized as being intangible and having simultaneous pro- 
sumer, that is profitable or potentially profitable and meets ductionlo)i,sumption, little standardization, and high 
the requirements of the various publics, governing, orinflu- buyer involvement 

encing society. There is a core product, a tangible prod- 5 The pro duct plan process includes the following: 

uct, an augmented product, and a promised product. a Determination of product objectives 

2. Consumer goods are purchased for personal consumption . b. Development of product plans to reach objectives 

3. Industrial goods are modified or distributed for resale. c. Development of appropriate strategies 



PRODUCT PLANNING AND STRATEGY FORMULATION 



169 



7. 



PUTTING LEVI'S BACK IN THE SADDLE 



Levi Straus & Co. is opting for a new marketing direction. 
The situation is reflected by Maressa Emmar, high school 
sophomore from Setaukat, N.Y., and her friends, who won't 
wear anything from Levi's. "It doesn't make the styles we 
want," says Emmar, who prefer.s baggy pants from JNCO and 
Kikwear. "Levi's styles are too tight and for the older gen- 
eration, like middle-aged people." 

After three years of tumbling sales, layoffs, plant closing, 
and a failed effort to woo kids online, Levi's is gearing up 
for several product launches. Notes new chief executive Philip 
Martineau, "Levi's is a mythical brand, but our performance 
has been poor. We need to turn our attention back to customers 
and have more relevant products and marketing." 

In coming months, Levi's will unveil a slew of youth- 
oriented fashions, ranging from oddly cut jeans to nylon pants 
that unzip into shorts. But Martineau is not giving up on the 
geezers. He wants to broaden Levi's appeal to grown-ups by 
extending the Dockers and Slates casual pants brands. Mar- 
tineau also needs to smooth out kinks in manufacturing and 
shipping that prevent Levi's from rushing new products into 
stores. 

How do you sell the idea that you're hip while not turn- 
ing off the oldsters? New ads will showcase the products them- 



selves rather than relentlessly trying to convey "attitude." A 
television campaign for frayed cutoff shorts shows a young 
woman throwing herjeans in front of an oncoming train, which 
slices them to cutoffs. Print will support its Lot 53 fashion- 
forward Levi's Engineeredjeans. This new style has curved- 
bottom hems, slanted back pockets and a larger watch pocket 
to hold pagers and other electronic items. 

As Levi'stry to rise like a phoenix from the ashes, one of 
the greatest American brand icons is passing into a new era 
in its history. Classic Levi's Jeans may find its greatest influ- 
ence, much like the American cowboy, is more myth than 
reality. 

Sources : Michael McCarthy and Emily Fromm, "An American 
Icon Fades Away," Adweek, April 26, 1999, pp. 28-35 ; Alice Z. 
Cuneo, "Levi's Makes Move to Drop All the Hype and Push Prod- 
ucts," Advertising Age. April 17,2000, pp. 4, 69; Louis Lee, "Can 
Levi's Be Cool Again?" Business Week. March 13, 2000, pp. 
144-145; Diane Brady. "Customizing for the Masses." Business 
Week. March 20, 2000. pp. 130-131. 



Defining the "New" in a New Product 

The determination of what constitutes a "new" product remains one of the most difficult 
questions faced by the marketer. Does the most recent TV model introduced by Sony rep- 
resent a new product even though 95% of the product remains the same as last year's model? 
Are packaged salads a new product, or is the package the only part that is really new? 

Indeed, companies have often been guilty of using the word "new" in conjunction 
with some questionable products. For example, older products have simply been marketed 
in new packages or containers but have been identified as new products by the manufac- 
turer. Flip-top cans, plastic bottles, and screw-on caps have all been used to create this image 
of newness. Industrial companies have been guilty of similar actions. Computer manufac- 
turers, for instance, have slightly modified some of the basic hardware or developed some 
software for a particular customer (banks, churches), and have felt free to claim newness. 
Finally, manufacturers may add an existing product to their product line and call it new, 
even though it is not new to the consumer. 

Does technology make a product new, or features, or even the price? It is important 
to understand the concept of "new" in a new product, since there is sufficient evidence that 
suggests that each separate category of "newness" may require a different marketing strategy. 

Perhaps the best way to approach this problem is to view it from two perspectives; 
that of the consumer and that of the manufacturer. 



170 



CHAPTE R 7 ENTROD UCING AND MANAGING THE PRODUCT 



The Consumer's Viewpoint There are a variety of ways that products can be clas- 
sified as new from the perspective of the conSJmer. Degree of consumption modification 
and task experience se:ve as two bases for classification. Robertson provides an insightful 
model when he suggests that new products may be classified according to how much behav- 
ioral change or new learning is required by the consumer in order to use the product. 10 

The continuum proposed by Robertson and shown in Figure 7.4 depicts the three pri- 
mary categories based on the disrupting influence the use of the product has on established 
consumption patterns. It is evident that most new products would be considered continu- 
ous innovations. Annual model changes in automobiles, appliances, and sewing machines 
are examples. Portable hair dryers, diet soda, and aerobic dance CDs reflect products in 
the middle category. True innovations are rare. 

Although conceptualizing new products in terms of how they modify consumer con- 
sumption patterns is useful, there is another basis for classification. New task experience 
can also be a criteria. An individual may live in a house for several years without ever hav- 
ing to repa;r a broken window. One day a mishap occurs, and Mr. Smith is forced to go to 
the hardware store to buy the necessary supplies required to install a new window pane. As 
he has no experience at all with this task, all those products are new to Mr. Smith. The glaz- 
ing compound, the new glass and molding, and metal tacks, as well as the appropriate tools, 
are as new to Mr. Smith as a home computer. Using the model proposed by Robertson , prod- 
ucts can also be placed on a continuum according to degree of task experience. Clearly, a 
product that has existed for a great many yean; such as a carpenter's level, may be per- 
ceived as totally new by the person attempting to build a straight wall. In this case, new- 
ness is in the eye of the beholder. 

The obvious difficulty with this classification is that it tends to be person-specific. 
Just because replacing a new washer in your bathroom faucet constitutes a new product for 
you doesn't mean it is a new product for me. However, it is conceivable that marketing 
research would show that for certain types of products, large groups of people have very 
limited experience. Consequently, the marketing strategy for such products might include 
very detailed instructions, extra educational materials, and sensitivity on the part of the sales 
clerk to the ignorance of the customer. 

Another possible facet of a new task experience is to be familiar with a particular 
product, but not familiar with all of its functions. For example, a homemaker may have a 
microwave oven which she uses primarily for reheating food items and making breakfast 
foods. Suppose that one afternoon her conventional oven breaks and she must deliver sev- 
eral cakes she has donated to a church bazaar. Unfortunately, she has not baked them yet 
and is forced to use her microwave, a brand-new task. 



Continuous 
innovations 



Least disrupting 
influence on 
established 
consumption 
patterns 



Dynamically 

continuous 

innovations 



Some disrupting 
influence on 
established 
consumption 
patterns 



Discontinuous 
innovations 



Involves 

establishment of 
new consumption 
patterns and the 
creation of 
previously 
unknown products 



FIGURE 7.4 Continuum for classifying new products 

Source: Thomas Robertson, "The Process of Innovation and the Diffusion of Innovation;' Journal ot Market- 
ing, January 1967, pp. 14-19. 



PRODUCT PLANNING AND STRATEGY FORMULATION 1 71 

The Firm's Viewpoint Classifying products in tenns of their newness from the per- 
spective of the manufacturer is also important. There are several levels of possible newness 
that can be derived through changes either in production, marketing, or some combination 
of both. 

Based on a schema developed by Eberhard Scheuing, new products, from the per- 
spective of the business, can take the following forms: n 

1. Changing the marketing mix: one can argue that whenever some e;ement of the 
marketing mix (product planning, pricing, branding, channels of distribution, adver- 
tising, etc.) is modified, a new product emerges. 

2. Modification: certain features (nornlally product design) of an existing product 
are altered, and may include external changes, technological improvements, or new 
areas of applicability. 

3. Differentiation: within one product line, variations of the existing products are 
added. 

4. Diversification: the addition of new product lines for other applications. 

A final consideration in defining "new" is the legal ruling provided by the Federal 
Trade Commission. Since the tenn is so prevalent in producl promotion, the FTC felt obliged 
to limit the use of "new" to products that are entirely new or changed in afunctionally sig- 
nificant or substantial respect. Moreover, the teon can be used for a six-month period of 
time. Given the limited uniqueness of most new products, this ruling appears reasonable. 

Strategies for Acquiring New Products 

Most large and medium-sized films are diversified, operating in different business fields. 
It would be unrealistic to assume that the individual firm is either capable or willing to develop 
all new products internally. In fact, most companies simultaneously employ both internal 
and external sources for new products. Both are important to the success of a business. 12 

Internal Sources Most major corporations conduct research and development to 
some extent. However, very few companies make exclusive use of their own internal R&D. 
On the contrary, many companies make excellent use of specialists to supplement their own 
capabilities. Still, to depend extensively upon outside agencies for success is to run a busi- 
ness on the blink of peril. Ideally, the closer the relationship between the new business and 
existing product lines, the better the utilization of R&D will be. The National Science Foun- 
dation (N3F) (1957-77) divides R&D into three parts: 

1. Basic research: original investigations for the advancement of scientific knowl- 
edge that do not have specific commercial objectives, although they may be in 
fields of present or potential interest to the reporting company 

2. Applied research: directed toward practical applications of knowledge, specific 
ends concerning products and processes 

3. Development: the systematic use of scientific knowledge directed toward the pro- 
duction of useful materials, devices, systems, or methods, including design and 
development of prototypes and processes 

External Sources External approaches to new product development range from the 
acquisition of entire businesses to the acquisition of a single component needed for the inter- 
nal new product development effort of the finn. The following external sources for new 
products are available to most firms. 



172 



CHAPTER 7 INTRODUCING AND MANAGING THE PRODUCT 




AD 7.2 The "Got Milk" campaign made an old product new. 



1. Mergers and Acquisitions. Acquiring another company already successful in a 
field your company wishes to enter iy an effective way of introducing products 
while still diversifying. Research suggests that mergers and acquisitions can take 
place between companies of various sizes and backgrounds, and that first expe- 
riences with this process tend to be less than satisfactory. Even large marketers 
such as General Motors engage in acquisitions. 



PRODUCT PLANNING AND STRATEGY FORMULATION 1 73 

2. Licenses and Patents. A patent, and the related license, arise from legal efforts 
to protect property rights of investors or of those who own inventions. A patent 
is acquired from the U.S. Patent Office and provides legal coverage for a period 
of seventeen years, which means all other manufacturers are excluded from mak- 
ing or marketing the product. However, there are no foolproof ways to prevent 
competition. There are two main types of patents: those for products and those 
for processes. The first covers only the product's physical attributes while the lat- 
ter covers only a phase of a production procedure, not the product. The patent holder 
has the right to its assignment or license. An assignment is any outright sale, with 
the transfer of all rights of ownership conveyed to the assignee. A license is a right 
to use the patent for certain considerations in accordance with specific terms, but 
legal title to the patent remains with the licensor. 

3. Joint Ventures. When two or more companies create a third organization to con- 
duct a new business, ajoint venture exists. This organization structure emerges, 
primarily, when either the risk or capital requirements are too great for any sin- 
gle firm to bear. Lack of technical expertise, limited distribution networks, and 
unfamiliarity with certain markets are other possible reasons . Joint ventures are 
common in industries such as oil and gas, real estate, and chemicals, or between 
foreign and domestic partners. 

Joint ventures have obvious application to product development. For exam- 
ple, small firms with technological resources are afforded an opportunity to acquire 
capital o** marketing expertise provided by a larger firm. 

The New Product Development Process 

Evidence suggests that there may be as many varieties of new product development sys- 
tems as there are kinds of companies . For the most part, most companies do have a formal 
comprehensive new product development system, and the evolution of such systems were 
not necessarily the result of systematic planning. The list of activities suggested in Figure 
7.5 illustrates the extensiveness of this process. Because of the complexity of the process, 
it is important that the general guidelines of effective management be applied to new prod- 
uct development. 13 

Before starting our discussion of the eight-step process of new product development, 
a necessary caveat should be considered: a great many new products fail. Depending on 
definitions used for products actually introduced, failure rates range between 20 percent 
and 30 percent, but have been as high as 80 percent. Of more concern than the level of fail- 
ure are the reasons for failure. Possibilities include: technical problems, bad timing, mis- 
understanding the consumer, actions by competitors, and misunderstanding the environment. 

Step 1: Generating New Product Ideas 

Generating new product ideas is a creative task that requires a specific way of thinking. 
Gathering ideas is easy, but generating good ideas is another story. Examples of internal 
sources are 

1. Basic research: many companies, such as DuPont, have several scientists who are 
assigned the task of developing new product ideas and related technology. 

2. Manufacturing: people who manufacture products often have ideas about modi- 
fications and improvements, as well as completely new concepts. 



1 74 CHAPTER7 INTRODUCING AND MANAGING THE PRODUCT 



Organize for 
new product 
development 



Product objectives j 



Assess sources 
of new products 



Generates new 
product ideas 



Target market 



Internal 



Externa! 



Product concept 
testing 



No go/go 

L 



Product 

testing 



Marketing 
plans 



' T 

No go/go 



Screen ideas 



Go/no go 
J 



Business 
analysis 



Commercialization 



FIGURE 7.5 The new product development process 



Laboratory 

R&D 

1 

Go/no go 

□,„,„, Manufacturing 

Prototype R&D 



Manufacturing 

plans 



Go/no go 
_) 



3. Salesperson: company salespeople and representatives can be a most helpful source 
of ideas, since they not only know the customer best, but they also know the com- 
petition and the relative strengths and weaknesses of existing products. 

4. Top management: the good top executive knows the company's needs and resources, 
and is a keen observer of technological trends and of competitive activity. 

External sources of new product ideas are almost too numerous to mention. 
A few of the more useful are: 



l. 



2. 



Secondary sources ofinformation: there are published lists of new products, avail- 
able licenses, and ideas for new product ventures. 

Competitors: good inferences about competitive product development can be made 
on the basis of indirect evidence gained from salespeople and from other exter- 
nal sources, including suppliers, resellers, and customers. 



PRODUCT PLANNING AND STRATEGY FORMULATION 1 75 

3. Customers: frequently customers generate new product ideas, or at least relay infor- 
mation regarding their problems that new and improved products would help to 
solve. 

4. Resellers: a number of firms use "councils" or committees made up of representa- 
tive resellers to assist in solving various problems, including product development. 

5. Foreign markets: many companies look toward foreign markets, especially West- 
ern Europe, because they have been so active in product development. 

There are probably as many approaches to collecting new product ideas as there are sources. 
For most companies, taking a number of approaches is preferable to a single approach. Still, 
coming up with viable new product ideas is rare (see the next Newsline box). 

Step 2: Screening Product Development Ideas 

The second step in the product development process is screening. It is a critical part of the 
development activity. Product ideas that do not meet the organization's objectives should 
be rejected. If a poor product idea is allowed to pass the screening state, it wastes effort 
and money in subsequent stages until it is later abandoned. Even more serious is the pos- 
sibility of screening out a wortnwhile idea. 



NEWSLINE: NEW IDEAS ARE RARE 

New product ideas can come from anywhere and everywhere. It's 
exciting when a new product idea comes from out of the blue, proto- 
types test well among consumers and purchase interest scores are off 
the charts. But relying on the "anywhere and everywhere" approach 
won't do in the long run. What is required for product development 
are methodologies that enable us to systematically discover new prod- 
uct opportunities. 

One such method is the category appraisal, which points to new 
product opportunities within an existing category and sometimes to 
opportunities in a new, adjacent category. The objective of the cate- 
gory appraisal study is to discover what makes the category "tick." 
Questions to ask include: 

• What drives consumer acceptability? 

• What are the strengths and weaknesses of each product in the 
category'? 

• What are the opportunities to outperform existing products'? 

• To what extent does brand equity playa role in product accept- 
ability? 

• Does collected data point to unexplored regions of the category 
"space" that new products can successfully fill? 

An example from the confectionary industry illustrates this tech- 
nique. The mission was to identify the properties of a new candy 
item for consumers who buy candy in supermarkets, convenience 
stores, and movie theaters. A database of in-depth sensory profile of 
a wide range of candy products and "liking scores" of each of those 
products was created. The researchers shopped 'till they dropped. 



176 CHAPTER 7 INTRODUCING AND MANAGING THE PRODUCT 



They thoroughly filled a sensory space in terms of texture, flavor, size, 
and appearance with 25-20 products. 

A questionraire was developed that required quantitative ratings 
(such as 100% scale ratings) of product attributes that were unique 
to some products. There were questions about hardness, chewiness, 
crispness, flavor intensity, degree of fruit flavor, sweetness, tartness, 
color, and many more. Overall liking for each product was also 
measured. 

How well each product and brand performed-the overall liking 
score for each product- was not an objective of the study. The point 
was to discover the most generalized drivers of consumer acceptability 
in the confectionary category. Products were ranked by their perform- 
ance and key sensory properties. Close study of the data revealed 
that these consumers were: not the least bit influenced by brand. 
Overall taste was the dominant factor. Second, a new chocolate prod- 
uct held the most promise. Of all flavors explored, chocolate capti- 
vated consumers most. In fact, the ideal product is chocolate-filled 
chocolates with chocolate dipping sauce. 

Sources: Jeff Braun, "Overcoming the Odds." Marketing News, March 29, 
1999. pp. 15-16: David Fishben, "Sweet Success: Category Appraisal is 
Proven Source of New Ideas," Marketing News. March 29, 1999, pp. 15-16; 
Tomina iCdmark, "On Your Mark," Entrepreneur, April 1999, pp. 161-162; Lau- 
rie Freeman, "Brach's Fruit Snacks Shapes," Advertising Age. June 28, 1999, 
pp. 5-7. 



There are two common techniques for screening new product ideas; both involve the 
comparison of a potential product idea against criteria of acceptable new products. The first 
technique is a si.nple checklist. For example, new product ideas can be rated on a scale rang- 
ing from very good to poor, in respect to criteria such as: value added, sales volume, patent 
protection, affect on present products, and so forth. Unfortunately, it is quite difficult for raters 
to define what is fair or poor. Also, it does not address the issue of the time and e;;pense 
associated with each idea, nor does it instruct with regard to the scores. A second technique 
goes beyond the first: the criteria are assigned importance weights and then the products are 
rated on a point scale measuring product compatibility. These scores are then multiplied by 
their respective weights and added to yield a total score for the new product idea. Table 7.1 
provides an example of both these techniques for screening new product ideas. 

Step 3: Business Analysis 

After the various product ideas survive their initial screen, very few viable proposals will 
remain. Before the development of prototypes can be decided upon , however, a further eval- 
uation will be conducted to gather additional information on these remaining ideas in order 
to justify the enormous costs required. The focus of the business analysis is primarily on 
profits, but other considerations such as social responsibilities may also be involved. 

The first step in the business analysis is to examine the projected demand. This would 
include two major "ources of revenue: the sales of the product and the sales or license of 
the technology developed for or generated as a by-product of the given product. 



PRODUCT PLANNING AND STRATEGY FORMULATION 



177 



TABLE 7.1 Screening Product Ideas 



Rating 




Weight 


Very Good 
(5) (4) 


Fair 
(3) 


Poor 

(2) (1) 


Unweighted 
Value 


Weighted 
Value 


Customer utilities 














- amusement 


.'1 


X 






5 


.5 


- comfort 


.1 




X 




3 


.3 


- convenience 


f~ 


:< 






4 


.8 


- satisfaction 


.3 


X 






4 


1.2 


- easy to use 


.1 




X 




3 


.3 


Ability to create 
effective sales 
appeals 


.3 


X 






4 


1.2 


Price 


1 






X 


2 


2 


Product quality 


.2 




X 




3 


.6 


Product profitability 


.2 




X 




3 


.6 


Attractiveness of 
product to customers 


.1 


/ 






4 


.4 


Ability to produce 
product in 
large volumes 


.3 


X 






5 


1.5 


Ability of new product 
in helping sale of 
other products 


.1 






X 




l 


Requires low 
capital investment 


.3 


i 






4 


1.2 


Product can be 
promoted through 















existing advertising 
Product can be 
produced in 
existing facilities 

Product can be 
distributed through 
existing channels 

Strength of competition 

Patent situation 
Total Score 



.3 
.2 
.1 



X 

X 



1.2 



3 


.9 


3 


.6 


. 2 


.2 


60 


12.4 



A complete cost appraisal is also necessary as part of the business analysis. It is dif- 
ficult to anticipate all the costs that will be involved in product development, but the fol- 
lowing cost items are typical: 

• Expected development costs, including both technical and marketing R&D 

• Expected set-up costs (production, equipment, dislribution) 

• Operating costs that account for possible economies of scale and learning curves 

• Marketing costs, especially promotion and distribution 

• Management costs 



178 CHAPTER 7 INTRODUCING AND MANAGING THE PRODUCT 



Step 4:Technical and Marketing Development 

A product that has passed the screen and business analysis stages is ready for technical and 
marketing development. Technical development involves two steps. The first is the applied 
laboratory research required to develop exact product specifications. The goal of this research 
is to construct a prototype model of the produc: that can be subjected to further study. Once 
the prototype has been created , manufacturing-methods research can be undertaken to plan 
the best way of making the product in commercial quantities under normal manufacturing 
conditions. This is an extremely important step, because there is a significant distinction 
between what an engineer can assemble in a laboratory and what a factory worker can 
produce. 

While the laboratory technicians are working on the prototype, the marketing depart- 
ment is responsible for testing the new product with its intended consumers and develop- 
ing the other elements of the marketing mix. The testing process usually begins with the 
concept test. The product concept is a synthesis or a description of a product idea that reflects 
the core element of the proposed product. For example, a consumer group might be assem- 
bled and the interview session might begin with the c;uestion: "How about something that 
would do this? ." 

The cecond aspect of market development involves consumer testing of the product 
idea. Thi^ activity must usually await the construction of tne prototype or, preferably, lim- 
ited-run production models Various kinds of consumer preference can be conducted. The 
product itself can be exposed ';o consumer taste or use tests. Packaging, labeling, and other 
elements in t;le mix can be similarly studied. Comparison tests are also used. 

Step 5: Manufacturing Planning 

Assuming that the product has cleared the technical and marketing development stage, the 
manufacturing department is asked to prepare plans for producing it. The plan begins with 
an appraisal of the existing production plant and the necessary tooling required to achieve 
the most economical producti.on. Fancy designs and material might be hard if not impos- 
sible to accommodate on existing production eql'ipment; new machinery is often time- 
consuming and costly to obtain. Compromise between attractiveness and economy is often 
necessary. 

Finally, manufacturing planning must consider the other areas of the organization and 
what is required of each. More specifically, they should determine how to secure the avail- 
ability of required funds, facilities , and personnel at the intended time, as well as the meth- 
ods of coordinating this effort. 

Step 6: Marketing Planning 

It is at this point that the marketing department moves into action again. The product plan- 
ner must prepare a complete marketing plan-one that starts with a statement of objectives 
and ends with [he fusion of product, distribution, promotion, and pricing into an integrated 
program of marketing action. 

Step 7: Test Marketing 

Test marketing is the final step before commercialization; the objective is to test all the vari- 
abilites in the marketing plan including elements of the product. Test markeiing represents 
an actual launching of the total marketing program. But it is done on a limited basis. 



PRODUCT PLANNING AND STRATEGY FORMULATION 



179 



TRICKIER THAN YOU THINK 



Everyone knows the fastest way to get rich is to start a dot-com 
business. According to the U.S. Commerce Department, traf- 
fic on the Internet doubles every 100 days. To acquire an audi- 
ence of 50 million, it took radio 30 years, television 13 years, 
personal computers 16 years, and the Internet/owr years. 

Still, marketers who go online expecting to make an 
"overnight killing" are in for a bruising lesson. Getting on the 
Web takes an investment, and once there, you have to build 
your Web presence and brand. And there are still technical 
and logistical hurdles to clear. Just ask Julie Wainwright, who 
got a firsthand look at the new math after the pet-products 
Web site she heads, Pet.com, went public in 2000. After mak- 
ing its debut at $11 a share, the San Francisco-based Inter- 
net company's stock rose to $14 and then promptly dropped 
below $3 • 

Volatility in the Internet business has produced a new 
industry-Internet consultants. As aresult, aplethora of rec- 
ommendations have emerged for entering an Internet busi- 
ness. Here are some of the suggestions: 

• Keep it simple-focus on providing compelling 
infOlmation. 

• Put customers first-understand them and meet their 
needs. 

• Make your site web-friendly— <ion ' t assume everyone 
is technically competent. 

• Spread the word-publicize your web address, offline 
as well as on the Net, by putting it everywhere you do 
business. 

• Be ready for success-a Web site can give you more 
business than you can handle. 



• Although e-business moves fast: managers shouldn't 
move carelessly— don't take risks that jeopardize reach- 
ing your goals. 

• Cash-flow problems are common with Internet start- 
ups-project the amount of cash needed, then double 
it. 

• Creating a true brand is specially difficult with Inter- 
net start-ups -excellent customer service, not adver- 
tising, is likely the answer. 

• Deliver the goods-getting goods delivered to a cus- 
tomer's doorstep in a timely manner is much more com- 
plicated for Internet businesses. 

• Actively monitor the customer-this ongoing dialogue 
leads to a deeper understanding of a customer's pref- 
erences and shopping habits, and that, in turn, leads to 
more personalized offerings and services. . 

Don't assume that the Web will solve all your problems 
or substitute for sound business judgment. " It is not some sort 
of get-rich-quick scheme," says Mark Weaver, professor of 
entrepreneurship at the University of Alabama. "You have to 
be even more a perfectionist, more meticulous, and more pre- 
pared to adjust to the changing rules of business online." 

Sources: Sreenath Sreenivasan, "Wrestling with the Web," Busi- 
ness Week, May 24, 1999, pp. F16-F19; Peggy Pulliam, "To Web 
or Not to Web," Internet Marketing, June 2000, pp. 37-41; Kara 
Swisher, "Reality Check," The Wall Street Journal, April 17,2000, 
p. R19; Erin Strout, "Launching an E-Business.' Sales & Market- 
ing Management, July 2000, pp. 89-91. 



Three general questions can be answered through test marketing. First, the overall 
workability of the marketing plan can be assessed. Second, alternative allocations of the 
buaget can be evaluated. Third, determining whether a new product introduction is inspir- 
ing users to switch from their previous brands to the new one and holding them there through 
subsequent repeat purchases is determined. In the end, the test market should include an 
estimate of sales, market share, and financial performance over the life of the product. 

Initial product testing and test marketing are not the same. Product testing is totally 
initiated by the producer: he selects the sample of people, provides the consumer with the 
test product, and offers the consumer some sort of incentive to participate. 

Test marketing, on the other hand, is distinguished by the fact that the test cities are 
to represent the national market, the consumer must make the decision herself, must pay 
her money, and the test product must compete with the existing products in the actual mar- 
keting environment. For these and other reasons a market test is an accurate simulation of 
the national market and serves as a method for reducing risk. It should enhance the new 



180 CHAPTER 7 INTRODUCING AND MANAGING THE PRODUCT 



product's probability of success and allow for final adjustment in the marketing mix before 
the product is introduced on a large scale. 

However, running a test marketing is not without inherent risks. First, there are sub- 
stantial costs in buying the necessary plant and machinery needed to manufacture the prod- 
uct oriocating manufacturers willing to make limited runs. There are also promotional costs, 
particularly advertising and personal selling. Although not always easy to identify, there 
are indirect costs as well. For example, the money used to test market could be used for 
other activities. The risk of losing consumer goodwill through the testing of an inferior prod- 
uct is also very real. Finally, engaging in a test-market might allow competitors to become 
aware of the new product and quickly copy it. 

Because of the special expertise needed to conduct test markets and the associated 
expenses, most manufacturers employ independent marketing research agencies with highly 
trained project directors, statisticians, psychologists, and field supervisors. Such afirm would 
assist the product manager in making the remaining test market decisions. 

1. Duration of testing: the product should be tested long enough to account for mar- 
ket factors to even out, allow for repeat purchases , and account for deficiencies 
in any other elements in the new product (three to six months of testing may be 
sufficient for a frequently purchased and rapidly consumed convenience item) . 

2. Selection of test market cities: the test market cities should reflect the norms for 
the new product in such areas as advertising, competition, distribution system, and 
product usage. 

3. Number oftest cities: sllOuld be based on the number of variations considered (i.e., 
vary price, package, or promotion), representativeness, and cost. 

4. Sample size determination: the number of stores used should be adequate to rep- 
resent the total market. 

Even after all the test results are in, adjustments in the product are still made. Additional 
testing may be required, or the product may be deleted. 

Step 8: Commercialization 

At last the product is ready to go. It has survived the developmem process and it is now on 
the way to commercial success. How can it be guided to that marketing success? It is the 
purpose of the lifecycle marketing plan to an:;wer this question. Such a complete market- 
ing program will, of course, involve additional decisions about distribution, promotion, and 
pricing. 



1. New product strategies begin by putting "new" on a c. Perform a business analysis 
continuum. d. Technical and marketing development 

2. There are both internal and external sources for acquiring e - Manufacturing planning 
new products. f Marketing planning 

i. The new product development process includes the fol- §' es mar e ln § 

lowing steps: 

a. Generate new product ideas 

b. Screen ideas 



h. Commercialization 




THE WALL STREET JOURNAL. 



IN PRACTICE 


ing, financing, and running a 


nal to find articles about these 


Organizations must introduce new 


business. 


companies and products. 


products and manage existing prod- 






ucts successfully to remain competi- 


ADDITIONAL SITES 




tive in today's marketplace. 


Check out www.adweek.com for 




Products are planned, and the prod- 


industry articles about advertising 




uct strategy aims to ensure that 


and brand development. The 




product objectives are achieved. 


Brandweek link on the site provides 




Unprecedented advancements 


weekly excerpts of headlines from 




in technology render shorter prod- 


the print edition. 




uct life cycles. As a result, product 


Advertising Age is another 




plans must provide competitive 


resource for information about 




distinctiveness. 


product strategies. Check out 




The Interactive Journal exam- 


www.adage.com. 




ines product development for large 


Business Week magazine's Web 




and small organizations in Market- 


site www.businessweek.com is a 




place. Under the Marketplace head- 


comprehensive site. Daily briefings 




ing, click on Small Business. This 


cover a wide range of topics. 




section provides articles targeted 






toward small and emerging 


DELIVERABLE 




businesses. 


Use the Interactive Journal and 




Special reports on small and 


Additional Sites listed here to find 




emerging businesses can be found 


three articles about product devel- 




in the Breakaway section, also 


opment. Read each article and com- 




under Small Business. 


pare the strategies employed by the 




Here you'll find more in-depih 


companies profiled. Why are the 




analysis about small business. The 


products successful, or why did they 




Interactive Journal also sponsors 


fail? Write a one-page brief sup- 




several online discussions. Click on 


porting your conclusions. 




one of the links to join an online 






discussion. 


DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 




Return to the Marketplace 






home page and click on the Busi- 


1. H ow do organizations identify 
product objectives when devel- 




ness Focus link on the left menu. 






This link directs you to articles dis- 


oping a product strategy? Why 




cussing general business develop- 


are these objectives important? 
2. What impact do market trends 




ments taking place in various 






companies. 


have on new product develop- 




Return to the Front Section 


ment? How do organizations 
decide whether to introduce a 




and select Starting a Business under 


new product or extend an exist- 




Resources in the left menu. This 






link sends you to the Startup Jour- 


ing product line? 
3. How does the media react to 




nal, a site designed to provide new 






business with a variety of tools. 


new products like Apple's 
iMac? What about product fail- 




Navigate the bar at the top of the 




site for information about franchis- 


ures like Coca-Cola's New 
Coke? Use the Interactive JOUf- 





181 



1 82 CHAPTER 7 INTRODUCING AND MANAGING THE PRODUCT 

SUMMARY 



The ability of the organization to consistently produce new products and effectively manage exist- 
ing products looms as one of the most important and difficult tasks faced by the company. This chap- 
ter provides an overview of the components that constitute a product, and the product planning process. 

The process begins with the task of defining the product. In order to provide an accurate por- 
trayal of the product, it is important to consider the perspective of the consumer, the manufacturer, 
and the various publics. All three perspectives must be understood and satisfied. In addition, the three 
components of the product are discussed. The core product identifies what the consumer expects when 
purchasing the product. The tangible product is reflected in its quality level, features, brand name, 
styling, and packaging. The augmented product is reflected by the services supporting the core/tan- 
gible product. The promised product suggests what the product delivers in the long term. 

There are also several classification schemes that are useful in improving our understanding 
of the product into three categories: convenience, shopping, and specialty. A convenience good is one 
that requires a minimum amount of effOlt on the part of the consumer. In contrast consumers want 
to be able to compare products categorized as shopping goods. Specialty goods are so unique, at least 
from the perspective of the consumer, that they will go to great lengths to seek out and purchase them. 

Another relevant classification scheme has been applied to business goods. Tlu'ee characteris- 
tics of business products are: (1) demand is derived from pLlfchase of another product, (2) demand 
Lends to be price-inelastic, and (3) tendency toward pure competition. Business products are classi- 
fied as extractive products and manufactured products. 

Goods products versus service products is the final categurization. Although there is still con- 
troversy about the validity of this separation, we contend that the differences justify adjustments in 
the marketing strategy for service products. Services are intangible, require simultaneous production 
and consumption, cannot be easily standardized, and require high consumer involvement. 

This chapter continues wiih a discussion of the product planning process. Three elements were 
delineated: (1) the determination of product objective, (2) the identification and resolution of factors 
that have an impact on the product, and (3) the development of programs appropriate for that par- 
ticular product. Examples of product objectives, as well as a discussion of the importance of prod- 
uct objectives, are provided. The third element of program development provides the basis for the 
two chapters that follow. The continuing development of successful new product looms as the most 
important factor in the survival of the firm. This chapter introduces the concept of "new" product as 
well as the process of actually producing a new product. 

It is noted that what constitutes a new product must be appraised from both the consumer's 
point of view as well as that of the manufacturer. In the former case, newness is measured in respect 
to : (I) degree of consumption modification and (2) the extent of new task experience. The firm defines 
the product in terms of: (1) changes in the marketing mix, (2) modifications, (3) differentiation, and 
(4) diversification. 

New products can be acquired from several internal and external SOluces. The firm can employ 
basic research, applied research, and development to develop new products. Or they can use the exter- 
nal route: mergers and acquisitions, licenses and patents, and joint ventures. 



MARKETER'S VOCABULARY 



Product Anything, either tangible or intangible, offered by the firm as a solution to the needs and 
wants of the consumer, that is profitable or potentially profitable and meets the requirements of the 
various publics governing or influencing society. 

Consumer goods Products purchased for personal consumption with no intention of selling to 
others. 

Industrial goods Products purchased by an individual or organization in order to modify the 
product or distribute it for a profit. 



CASE APPLICATION 183 

Packaging Provides protection, containment, communication, and utility for the product. 

Product lifecycle A product planning tool that parallels the stages of the human lifecycle. 

Brand Identifies thC product and distinguishes it from competitors. 

Position A strategic management decision that determines the place a product should occupy in a 
given market. 



DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 



1 . What overriding objectives should be kept in mind when designing a product strategy? 

2. How do the strategies of market extension and market segmentation differ? 

3. Identify the steps a product manager should take in deciding how to position a product. 

4. In what kind of market situation will a strategy of product differentiation be most effective? 

5. What are the four product mix strategies discussed in the chapter? Name three reasons why a 
company might decide to alter its product mix. 

6. What factors would impact a marketing manager's decision to engage in a temporary or perma- 
nent price change for a mature product? 

7. How would you define the term "product"? Differentiate between the points of view of the man- 
ufacturer and the customer. 

8. Distinguish between convenience goods, shopping goods, and specialty goods. Can you think of 
examples that belong in each category, other than those discussed in the chapter? 

9. Compare and contrast the consumer's view and the firm's view of a new product. 

10. Describe the steps in the new product development process. Are all these steps necessary? 



PROJECT 



Identify a product that you feel is in the maturity or decline stage. Determine the characteristics of 
this product in light of the discussion throughout Olis chapter. Write a 3-5 page analysis. 



CASE APPLICATION 



HERSHEY CHOCOLATE MILK 

Hershey Foods Corp. is making an unusual move in using national TV advertising for its chocolate 
milk, a product that historically hasn't received much ad support. The national TV commercial, which 
first aired in June 1983, was shot in 12 weeks in London by Clearwater Productions. Doyle Dane 
Bernbach in New York develuped the commercial, which has been shown nationally on a children's 
network and in the early fringe time period. 

"The commercial's creative, it's aggressive. It breaks one cardinal rule by not mentioning this 
new product until 75% into the commercial. But the commercial works. We think its unique," says 
Bob Jeffery, DDB VP account supervisor. He admits that the Hershey packaging also has had an impor- 
tant consumer impact. "The carton practically screams chocolaie." 



184 



CHAPTER 7 INTRODUCING AND MANAGING THE PRODUCT 



According to Hershey sales figures, Hershey chocolate milk is the number-one chocolate milk 
in the country. These results are indeed admirable considering the gamble Hershey took with their 
chocolate milk. It was the first time Hershey had attempted to sell a premixed beverage or promote 
a product not under its direct control. Hershey is licensing the use of its name on the chocolate milk- 
another big first for the company. Hershey sells powdered chocolate to large dairies, which mix the 
product with their milk, package it, and handle distribution. Following strict standards, Hershey has 
selected only certain dairies to be licensed to use the Hershey chocolate powder and labeL Each dairy 
must follow detailed specification on mixing. To make sure there are no slip-ups, Hershey has printed 
a toll-free telephone number for consumers to call if they have complaints about the chocolate milk. 

For Hershey. the taste of success is sweet. 

Questions: 

1. What type of innovation is Hershey chocolate milk? 

2. How would you describe the product development process Hershey followed? 

3. Describe any potential problems. 



REFERENCES 



L.P. Bucklin, "Retail Strategy and the Classification of Consumer 
Goods," Journal of Marketing, January 1963, pp. 53-54. 
Robert G. Cooper, 1992. "New Product Success in Industrial Firms," 
Industrial Marketing Management, pp. 215-223. 
Leonard L. Berry, "Services Marketing Is Different," Business Mag- 
azine, May-June 1980, pp. 19-28. 

Brian O'Reilly, 1997. "New Ideas, New Products," Fortune, March 
3, 1999, pp. 61-64. 

Joel Dean, Manage rial Economics, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice- 
Hall, Inc., 1951, pp. 411-412. 

RobertJ. Kelsey. "The Process of Innovation and Diffusion of Inno- 
vation," Journal o/Marketing, January 1978, pp. 14-19. 
Patrick Oster, "The Erosion of Brand Loyalty," Business Week, July 
19, 1993, p. 22. Stephanie Thompson, "Brand Buddies," Brandweek, 
February 23, 1998. pp. 22-30. 



8. David A. Aaker and J. Gary Shansby, "Positioning Your Product," 
Business Horizons, .Vlay-June 1982, pp. 56-62. 

9. Robert G. Cooper and Elko J. Kleinschmidt, New Product: The Key 
Factors to Success, Chicago: American Marketing Association, 1990. 

10. Thomas Robertson, "The Process of Innovation and Diffusion of 
Innovation," Journal ofMarketing, January 1967, pp. 14-19. 

11. Eberhard Scheming, New Product Management, Hinsdale, IL: The 
Dryden Press, 1974. 

12. Pam Weise, "Getting Hot New ideas from Customers." Fortune, May 

19, 1992,pp. 86-87. 

13 . Abbie Griffin, "PDMA Research on New Product Development Prac- 
tices: Updating Trends and Benchmarking Best Practices," Journal 
of Product Innovation Management, Vol. ]4, November 1997, 
pp. 429-458. 



CHAPTERS 



COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



LEARNING OBJECTIVES 



Upon completion of this chapter, you should have an understanding 
of the following: 

The role of integrated marketing communication (IMC) to effec- 
tively communicate the marketer's message to ixs market 
audience. 

The definition of the four components used in IMC: advertising, 
persona: selling, sales promotion, and public relations. 

The principles of effective communication and how they apply to 
marketing communication. 

The primary steps followed in designing an IMC strategy. 

The role and techniques associated with advertising. 

The role and techniques associated with sales promotion. 

The role and techniques associated with public relations. 

The role and techniques associated with personal selling. 



AMERICAN EXPRESS: COMMUNICATING BIG IDEAS 



Jerry Walsh has once again come up with a big marketing idea. Walsh, executive 
vice president of worldwide marketing for and the creative genius behind American 
Express, has discovered an idea that is exactly what he is looking for-something to 
replace the venerabie "Do You Know Me?" ads and head off challenges from Visa and 
Diners Club. It's the ultimate in soft sell, he insists; the kind of pitch you're more likely 
to see on public television than on the networks. The ads don't talk to people about 
American Express as much as they talk to people about themselves, about their values 
and lifestyles. "This new campaign is going to cause tremendous excitement. It's what 
we do best-it's the Big Idea." 

This is one in a long string of big ideas. Big ideas that have turned American 
Express into what some experts say is the nation's top marketer. Big ideas like the 
"Interesting Lives" ad campaign, which taught corporate America a whole new way of 
selling to women. And promotion like the company's cause-related campaign to aid the 
restoration of the Statue of Liberty that gave doing good deeds a gilt edge. Each time the 
credit card was used, the company made a donation, which netted $1.7 million for Miss 
Liberty and made millions for the company in fees from increased card use. 

The ability of American Express to communicate to the public in new ways made 
it the most successful provider of credit cards, travel, and financial services. In 1993, the 



185 



1 86 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



American Express card (the heart of the company's business) rang up nearly $80 billion 
in purchases in nearly 60 million separate transactions, making it the card most used by 
Americans. 

Much of the credit for success must go to Ae manner in which American Express 
has taken big ideas and converted them into major marketing programs. The process 
begins with "the hunt." Big ideas can be found anywhere, by anyone-and everybody 
keeps an eye peeled. The "Interesting Lives" idea, for example, was buried deep in the 
copy of a new "women's" ad campaign, developed by their agency Ogilvy and Mather. 
Since the campaign began in 1983, the number of new card members who are women 
has jumped from 29% to more than 50%. Moreover, nmes Walsh, "Big ideas make us 
unstoppable because they take the high ground. There's no way to counteract big ideas 
without imitating them." 

American Express has a very unstnictured corporate environment. Consequently, 
every big idea needs a "champion"-someone who can charge ahead with the big idea 
with a minimum of restraint. Champions are allowed a free rein because management 
trusts their top people. Failure's no big deal at American Express. Marketing research 
doesn't drive the business-instinct does. 

Since there are always four or five big ideas competing against each other, "bat- 
tles" are inevitable. In the case of the American Express Platinum Card, the fights were 
particularly brutal. In meeting after heated meeting, opposing sides battled over the 
name, the price, the look of the card, etc. The champion of each idea openly battled each 
other. There are some rules, though. No one attacks anyone personally. Everyone's 
friends the minute the battle is over. And absolutely no politics. 

In the end, Walsh's idea may not win. His big idea has some formidable foes who 
think it is simply too soft of a sell. Walsh is far from defeat. He's constantly drumming 
up support and making subtle changes in the ads themselves. Even if his idea isn't 
selected this time, he won't stop fighting. "My idea may retire briefly, but it won't die. 
We'll change it a little here, a little there, and, before you know it, it'll be reincarnated," 
says Walsh. "You don't win by wimping out." 

Sources: Mark Padden. "Amex's Blue Card Needs More Than Good Looks 10 Succeed," Future Banker, November I. 1999. 
p. 52: "Advanced Cards 101: What Makes Them So Smart and So Secure?" Canadian Business, August 7. 2000, p. 15; "Magic 
Promotes Amex Blue Business Card," Business and Industry, Vol. 2000, No. 95, May 17, 2000, p. 1; Michael Dumiak, "Adver- 
tising Campaigns: Amex Unrivaled in Advenising Spending," Financial Service Marketing. Vol. 2. No. 4, May 15, 2000. p. 8. 



INTRODUCTION 



The case example clearly points to one of the most difficult problems facing marketers. How 
can a marketer clearly and effectively communicate the story (message) in a society that is 
so overcommunicated that the typical consumer is both overwhelmed with the vast num- 
ber of messages and annoyed at the thousands of messages that have no relevance what- 
soever to that person's needs and wants? The amount of sameness, and the amount of 
communication clutter is so excessive, that the approach employed by American Express 
appears to be the only answer. Yet, as we have noted throughout this text, the needs and 
capabilities of marketers vary, and not all marketers are blessed with a creative genius like 



THE ROLE OF IMe 1 87 

Jerry Walsh. Nor do all marketers require a multimillion dollar national advertising cam- 
paign in order to reach objectives. All marketers, however, must learn to communicate their 
strategy to their target market. 

The concept of Integrated Marketing Communication (IMe) is offered as a general 
framework, which can be employed by marketers in order to design a comprehensive and 
effective program of communication. It acknowledges the inherent differences between mar- 
keters and builds upon the reality that "every company is cast in the role of communica- 
tor." Ultimately, it is the choice of each company whether this communication process will 
be performed in a haphazard, unplanned way, or whether it will be guided by stated objec- 
tives and implemented through effective strategies. 

This chapter introduces the concept of IMC, a framework for organizing the persua- 
sive communication efforts of the business. Because of its visibility, many consumers feel 
that they already know a great deal about IMC, or at least about advellising. Most hold either 
a somewhat positive or negative attitude toward advertising, aggressive salespeople, coupons, 
and so forth. This is a case when a little bit of information can be a dangerous thing. 

This chapter also provides a discussion of four of the IMC mix elements-advertising, 
sales promotion, public relations, and personal selling. We begin our discussion with an 
explanation of the role IMC plays in the marketing strategy. 



THE ROLE OF IMe 



The heart of every transactional exchange is communication between parties. The buyer 
seeks certain basic information about product features, price, quality, support service, rep- 
utation of the seller, and so forth. All this information is intended to assess how close each 
alternative is to meeting desired needs and wants. We seek information to reduce possible 
risk associated with the transaction. Presumably, the more solid the information we have, 
the more secure we feel in our decision. The seller also desires information. The seller wants 
to know whether you qualify as a buyer (i. e. , do you really need the product and can you 
pay for it), which product features are important to you, what other choices you are con- 
sidering, are you ready to buy, how much do you know about my product, and so forth. 
Therefore, all the parties enter a transaction with a whole set of questions they want answers 
to. Some of these questions are quite explicit: "How much does it cost?" Others are quite 
vague and may almost be subconscious: "Will this product make me feel better about myself?" 
All these decisions relate to the marketer's ability to integrate marketing communications 
(IMe). 

The primary role of IMC is to systematically evaluate the communication needs and 
wants of the buyer and, based on that information, design a communication strategy that 
will (1) provide answers to primary questions of the target audience, (2) facilitate the cus- 
tomer's ability to make correct decisions, and (3) increase the probability that the choice 
they make most often will be the brand of the information provider, i.e. , the sponsor or mar- 
keter. 1 Marketers know that if they learn to fulfill this role, a lasting relationship with the 
customer can be established. 

Primary Tasks 

I f the marketer is to consistently and effectively communicate with consumers, three pre- 
liminary tasks must be acknowledged and achieved. First, there must be a mechanism for 
collecting, storing, analyzing, and disseminating relevant infornlation. This includes infor- 
mation about customers (past, present, potential), competitors, the environment, trends in 



188 



CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



the industry, and so forth. The quality of communication is closely related to the quality of 
information. Kellogg's, for example, constantly monitors its customers through surveys and 
consumer panels, and keeps track of its competitors and changes in the Food and Drug Admin- 
istration in order to assess the relevance of all its communication vehicles. 

Second, communication is not one-way; it is a dialogue. That is, all relevant parties 
are actually participating in the communication process. Marketers must provide a system 
that constantly allows the consumer to express desires, satisfactions, complaints, and dis- 
appointments about the product, the price, the message, or the way it is distributed. There 
is a real tendency in large-scale marketing to view the consumer as a faceless, nameless 
entity, without individual needs and wants . Effective marketing communication allows direct 
feedback (e.g., toll-free numbers, hotlines, service departments), and actively responds by 
making substantial changes to address customer requests. 

Finally, there must be an acknowledgement that target customers may not be the same 
as target audiences. While the target market is concerned primarily with individuals who 



fMC-HARDER THAN YOU THINK 



According to IMC guru Don Schultz, the difficulty in devel- 
oping an integrated marketing communication program is in 
the planning. He notes that most managers have tried to inte- 
grate communication elements and activities as they were 
developed by various functional groups. Or they have tried 
to bring all the elements together once the communications 
concept was developed to generate one voice or a unifying 
brand theme that will tie all the disparate elements together. 

Unfortunately, managers have been approaching the 
problem as one of coordination or consolidation, although 
integration is not at the end of the process, but at the begin- 
ning. The difficulty has been that there is not a system via 
which managers can develop truly integrated marketing 
communications. 

A new approach to integration is based on the planning 
matrix. The matrix mantra goes like this: "From consolidate 
and segregate, to aggregate and integrate." The meaning is sim- 
ple. Traditionally, we have tried to take a market or a cate- 
gory and segment it. Once we segmented the market, we then 
tried to apply various communication disciplines-advertising, 
sales promotion, or direct marketing. We tried to take activ- 
ities that had been developed separately and pulled them into 
an integrated whole. In short, we've tried to "consolidate and 
segregate." Take the market, segment it, and then communi- 
cate separately to the segments. 

Consider a new approach. Rather than starting with total 
market, start with individual customers and prospects. 
Aggregate them based on their behavior. Let the customers 
and prospects create their own groups or'segments. That's 
aggregation. Then look at the way customers and prospects 



experience marketing communications. Most consumers aren't 
familiar with the tightly defined marketing communications 
disciplines we have developed. To them, most everything we 
do is either an advertisement or an incentive. That's the sec- 
ond part of the new approach. Integrate, and most of all, sim- 
plify. 

Now, the planning process is simple. At the top, we have 
how consumers think about and evaluate marketing commu- 
nication activities. It's either a message or an incentive. We 
have collapsed all the very sophisticated marketing commu- 
nication disciplines into what they are supposed to do: deliver 
a message or an incentive. 

The second part of the matrix is the impact we expect the 
activity to have-short-term or long-term. What will be the 
basis for the measurement of the impact of the planned com- 
munications program? For purposes of measurement, almost 
everything can be considered short-term, or within the fiscal 
year. Long-term is anything more than one fiscal year. Build- 
ing immediate sales for our product or service is short-term. 
Brand building is long-term. Therefore, we plan whether we'll 
give our target messages or incentives and the impact of those 
messages or incentives, either short-term or long-term. 

Sources: Don E. Schultz, "A New IMC Mantra," The Marketing 
News, May 26, 1997, p. 8; Richard Linnett, "Full COlirt Press," 
Adweek, January 31, 2000, pp. 3-6; Don E. Schultz, "Structural 
Straight Jackets Stifle Integrated Success," The Marketing News, 
March 1, 1999, p. 8; Don E. Schultz, "How to Create Your Own 
Worst Enemy," The Marketing News, July 3, 2000, p. 10. 



THE MEANING OF MARKETING COMMUNICATON 1 89 

are users and potential users of the product, the target audience may encompass a much 
larger or smaller group of people. More specifically, the target audience includes all indi- 
viduals, groups, and institutions that receive the marketing message and employ this infor- 
mation either as a basis for making a product decision or in some way employ it to evaluate 
the sponsoring business. Thus, the target market for E.P.T. pregnancy tests might be women 
between the ages of 18-34, with a college education; the target audience might also include 
parents of the youngest of these women, who either approve or disapprove of this product 
based on advertising messages, government agencies who assess the truthfulness of the prod- 
uct claims, and potential stockholders who determine the future success of the firm based 
on the perceived quality of the messages. IMC must identify all members of the target audi- 
ence and must consider how the communication strategy must change in response to this 
membership. 

In the end, the role of IMC is to communicate with target audiences in a manner that 
accurately and convincingly relays the marketing strategy of the firm. 

Integrated Marketing Communication 

Instead of afunctional approach, IMC attempts to integrate these functions into a collective 
strategy. If conducted properly, IMC results in a more effective achievement of an organi- 
zation's communications objectives. Although it is difficult to determine exactly what prompted 
the move to IMC, experts speculate as to several possible interrelated causes. Historically, 
mass media has been characterized because of its general inability to measure its results, 
especially sales. Recently, the availability of consumer information (especially purchase pat- 
terns) through single-source technology such as store scanners and other related technology 
has meant that marketers are now able to correlate promotional activities with consumer behav- 
ior. During this same period, companies have been downsizing their operations and task expec- 
tations have been expanded. This greater expectation has carried over into the 
client-advertising agency relationship. Agency employees can no longer remain specialists. 
Rather, they must understand all the functions performed for the client, as well as their own. 
In reality, IMC appears to be much the same as a promotional strategy, a concept that has 
been around for several years. Perhaps the term "IMC" has emerged due to the confusion 
with the term "sales promotion" and the failure of promotion to be adopted by the adver- 
tising industry. Only time will tell whether IMC will become a salient part of marketing com- 
munication . (More was said about IMC in the previous Integrated Marketing box .) 

THE MEANING OF MARKETING COMMUNICATION 

Defining the concept of marketing communication (MC) is not an easy task, because in a 
real sense, everything the company does has communication potential. The price placed on 
a product communicates something very specific about the product. A company that chooses 
to distribute their products strictly through discount stores tells the consumer a great deal. 
Yet if all of these things are considered communication, the following definition is offered: 

Marketing communication includes all the identifiable efforts on the part of the seller 
that are intended to help persuade buyers to accept the seller's message and store it 
in retrievable form. 

Note that the central theme of the communication process is persuasion. Communication 
is most defmitely goal-directed. It is not intended to be an arbitrary, haphazard activity. Each 
of the tools used ir. marketing communication has specific potentialities and complexities 



190 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



that justify managerial specialization and require directed efforts. Yet a company, even a 
very large one, typically does not have a specialist in each area, but only in those cases 
where the importance and usage frequency of the tool justify specialized competence. His- 
torically, companies first made a separate function out of the personal selling function, later 
out of advertising, and still later out of public relations. The remaining tools (e.g. coupons, 
specials) were employed by the directors of these functional areas as needed. Although the 
definitions vary, the four components that make up marketing communication are as follows: 

1. Advertising: Any paid form of nonpersonal presentation of ideas, goods, or serv- 
ices by an identified sponsor. Although some advertising is directed to specific 
individuals (as, for example, in the use of direct mail), most advertising messages 
are tailored to a group, and employ mass media such as radio, television, news- 
paper, and magazines. 

2. Personal selling: An oral presentation in a conversation with one or more prospec- 
tive purchasers for the purpose of making sales. It includes several different forms, 
such as sales calls by a field representative (field selling), assistance by a sales 
clerk (retail selling), having an Avon representative call at your home (door-to- 
door selling), and so forth. 

3. Public relations: A nonpersonal stimulation of demand for a product, service, or 
business unit by planting commercially significant news about it in a published 
medium (i.e., publicity) or obtaining favorable presentation of it through vehicles 
not paid for by the sponsor. Although commissions are not paid to the various media, 
there are salaries and other expenses that mean that public relations is not a cost- 
less form of promotion. 

4. Sales promotion: Those marketing activities that add to the basic value of the prod- 
uct for a limited time period and thus directly stimulate consumer purchasing and 
dealer effectiveness. These activities include displays, shows and exhibitions, 
demonstrations, and various nonrecurring selling efforts not in the ordinary rou- 
tine. As the provision for an additional incentive to buy, these tools can be directed 
at consumers, the trade, or the manufacturer's own sales force. 



THE OBJECTIVES OF MARKETING COMMUNICATION 

The basic objectives of marketing communication have been reduced to three more mean- 
ingful directives: (1) to communicate, (2) to compete, and (3) to convince. The primary pur- 
pose of MC is to communicate ideas to target audiences. This is done through advertising, 
personal selling, sales promotion, and/or public relations. Principles of effective commu- 
nication are intended to achieve this task. Clearly, most of marketing is communications, 
and it is in this context that communication is included as a purpose of Me. Moreover, what- 
ever is communicated should be accurate, truthful, and useful to the parties involved. Because 
of the pervasiveness of marketing communication, it has a unique responsibility to com- 
municate with integrity. 

Helping the company to compete consistently and effectively in the marketplace is 
the second objective. For many companies, MC may offer the company its most promis- 
ing marketing opportunities. Competitors may sell essentially the same product, at the same 
price, in the same outlets. It is only through MC that the company may be able to appeal 
to certain segments, properly differentiate its product, and create a level of brand loyalty 
that can last for many years. In addition, the prominence of extensive communication efforts 



HOWWE COMMUNICATE 191 

on the part of competitors means that a company that did not exhibit a strong MC program 
would appear dull and unconvincing to the customer. Thus, MC is employed as both a defen- 
sive and offensive weapon. 

The final objective of MC is to convince. Although this goal is most often ascribed 
to MC, it is the most questionable. "Convince" and "persuade" are not synonymous terms. 
Realistically, MC does extremely well if it presents ideas in a manner that is so convinc- 
ing that the consumer will be led to take the desired action. These ideas, along with a host 
of other factors, will help persuade the consumer to make a particular decision. Therefore, 
the ability of MC to present information in a convincing manner is critical. It is also nec- 
essary to reconvince many consumers and customers, lust because a person buys a partic- 
ular brand once or a dozen times, or even for a dozen years, there is no guarantee that they 
won't stop using the product if not constantly reminded of the product's unique benefits. 
Ultimately, MC objectives can be broken down into very specific tasks. The point is all MC 
must be guided by objectives. 

In conclusion, effective marketing communication should present useful ideas (infor- 
mation) in a manner that makes them clearly understood (communicate), cause the con- 
sumer to believe the message is true (convince), and is as appealing or more appealing than 
the message delivered by competitors (compete). 



HOWWE COMMUNICATE 



Because communication is such an integral part of effective marketing, it is important that 
we provide a basic understanding of its process. Our starting point is a basic definition of 
human communication: a process in which two or more persons attempt to consciously or 
unconsciously influence each other through the use of symbols or words in order to satisfy 
their respective needs. 

Basic Elements of Communication 

The basic elements within any communication system are depicted in Figure 8.1. It includes 
two or more people or organizations called communicators. The underlying assumption of 
this model is that all communications (dialogue) are continuous. This factor suggests that 
we are constantly and simultaneously in the role of communicator and receiver. Each com- 
municator is composed of a series of subsystems (i.e., inputs, outputs, processing). The input 
subsystem permits the communicator to receive messages and stimulus from outside as well 
as from the other communicator. It involves the reception of light, temperature, touch, sound 
and, odors via our eyes, skin, ears, nose, and tastebuds. These stimuli are intimately eval- 
uated through a process called perception. Thus, we input and perceive advertising mes- 
sages, a 50 cents-off coupon, the appearance and words of a salesperson, and so forth. 3 

The processing subsystem of a communicator includes all thought processes. As we 
process, we generate, organize, and reflect on ideas in response to the stimuli received. This 
entire process is determined not only by the stimuli just received, but also by all stimuli 
ever received, such as past experiences, education, health, genetics, and all other factors in 
our environment. Some people clearly process the humor in the Pepsi-Cola ads better than 
others. 

The output subsystem includes the messages and other behaviors produced by the com- 
municator. These include nonverbal messages, verbal messages, and other physical behav- 
iors. All of these become input (feedback) for other people and can have both intentional 
and unintentional effects on them. 



192 



CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 







INTERFERENCE 



FIGURE 8.1 A model of human communication 



Friend, parent, boss, client, or customer are just some of the roles we may portray in 
any communication process. The nature of the role directly affects the nature of commu- 
nication. We communicate quite differently with our boss than we do with close friends. 
People who have known each other for a long time often devise their own communication 
system, which may include lots of nonverbal signals. 

Finally, the communicatioa system exists within an environment. The environment 
is everything internal and external to the communication system that can affect the system 
(family, school, competing advertisements, etc.). Each of the factors within the environ- 
ment interacts with the communication system to a different degree. Because communica- 
tion systems are open to the influence of the total environment, we can never analyze a 
communication event from only the point of view of the people who seem obviously involved. 
Everything may affect communication, positively or negatively. The iatter factors may alter 
or distort inputs, outputs, or processing and are called interference. Interference can be gen- 
erated internally (e.g., fear, love, prejudice) or externally (e.g., noise, weather, physical 
appearance) . 



HOW WE COMMUNICATE 



193 



1. The primary role of IMC is to systematically evaluate the 
communication needs and wants of the buyer and, based 
on that information, design a communication strategy that 
will: provide answers to primary questions of the target 
audience; facilitate the customer's ability to make correct 
decisions; and increase the probability that the choice they 
make will most often be the brand of the information 
provider. 

2. Marketing communications is defined as a message deliv- 
ery system that includes all the identifiable efforts on the 
part of the seller that are intended to help persuade buy- 
ers to accept the seller's message and store it in retriev- 
able form. 

3. The four components that make up marketing communi- 
cation are: advertising, sales promotion, public relations, 
and personal selling. 



4. The basic objectives of marketing communication are to: 
communicate, convince, and compete. 

5. The elements of human communication include: 

a. The processing subsystem 

b. The output subsystem 

c. The nature of the role 

d. The environment 

6. There are four types of communication systems: 

a. Interpersonal 

b. Organizational 

c. Public 

d. Mass 



Types of Communication Systems 

There are several types of communication systems, classified depending on the level of con- 
tact between communicators and the ability to respond to feedback. 

Interpersonal Communication Systems 

At the basic level of interpersonal communication systems is the dyadic context. A dyad 
consists of two people, or two major subsystems. Personal selling falls under this heading. 

Organizational Communication Systems 

The organizational communication context represents a much more complex system than 
interpersonal communication. Examples include a bank, a factory, a retail store, or the gov- 
ernment attempting to communicate with one another. These systems include a large col- 
lection of subsystems, all organized around a common goal(s). Interactive technology has 
changed these types of systems in a dramatic way. 

Public Communication Systems 

This type of system involves communication usually from one person to a large group of 
people. Although everyone affects everyone else to some degree in every communication 
system, in a public communication context, such as a speech from a politician to people 
standing behind a platform of a campaign train, the speaker does most of the talking. 



Mass Communication Systems 

The mass communication context exists when a person/organization is communicating indi- 
rectly with a large group of people and there is even less opportunity for people to inter- 
act freely with one another and to mutually affect one another. Advertising and public relations 
are such mass communications. 



194 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



Marketing 
communication 



External 
flow 



Internal 
flow 



Target audiences 



Target audiences 



Customers 



Resellers 



Companies 



Publics 



- Past 

- Present 

- Future 



Competing 
Noncompeting 

Government 

Agencies 

Groups 



Employees 



Stockholders 



Functions 



FIGURE 8.2 The flow of marketing communication 



Marketing Communications 

While all communication includes the same basic components depicted in Figure 8.1, mar- 
keting communication differs somewhat in two respects. First, the intent of marketing com- 
munications is to present a persuasive message, which reinforces the total offer made by 
the marketer. Essentially, all marketing communication attempts to create uniqueness in the 
mind of the target audience. 

Second, marketing communication can be divided into two flows (i.e., internal and 
external), which are directed at different target audiences. This necessitates different com- 
munication strategies, which, never the less, must be compatible. A company cannot be telling 
a customer one story and stockholders another. The flow of marketing communication is 
depicted in Figure 8.2. 



DESIGNING AN IMe STRATEGY 



The design of an effective IMC strategy is a very difficult and time-consuming process that 
requires the efforts of many members of the marketing staff. Although there has been a great 
deal of variety in designing this process, the steps depicted in Figure 8.3 are most common. 

As is the case with most marketing activities, IMC is guided by a set of objectives. 
There are numerous responses that the manager may desire from his IMC effort. Although 
the ultimate buyer behavior desired is product purchase, several intermediate responses may 
prove important as well. Examples of these intermediate responses are shown in Figure 8.4. 

If there is a marketing opportunity, there must also be a communication opportunity. 
Although the role of IMC is de-emphasized in certain marketing programs, there will also 
be some communicative, motivational, or competitive tasks to be performed. Whether or 



DESIGNING AN IMe STRATEGY 1 95 





Determine objectives . 




- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 


1 




Determine promotional 
opportunities 




1 






Select audiences ■ ■ 


Marketing 

information 

system 


- 


1 1 1 


\ 








Select message(s) . . 




1 




Determine budget , . 




1 




Allocate funds , . 




1 




Measure results . . 




1 




1 Organizing . . 



FIGURE 8.3 The IMe Strategy 



not the marketing programs should rely heavily on its communication ingredient to per- 
fonn such tasks depends upon the nature and extent of the opportunity. There are several 
conditions which, if they exist, indicate a favorable opportunity to communicate: for exam- 
ple, it is always easier to communicate effectively when moving with the current consumer 
demand rather than against it. Companies such as IBM have been actively promoting their 
business computers, which are increasing in popularity, rather than home computers, which 
are not doing as well. 

The third consideration is selecting the target audience for the IMC. This is undoubt- 
edly the most important factor in the IMC strategy, yet it is probably the issue that many 
companies slight or overlook entirely. Marketing messages must be directed at the specific 
target for which the overall marketing program is being designed. However, very seldom 
is there a single group of consumers at which to direct promotion. Many individuals affect 
the buying process, and the IMC program must be designed to reach all of them. In addi- 
tion to the primary purchasers and users of the product, individuals who influence the pur- 
chase decision must also be considered. For example, consumers usually rely heavily upon 
the assistance and advice of others in purchasing such products as automobiles, interior dec- 
orating, major appliances, and physicians, to name but a few. Similarly, industrial buyers 
consider the advice of engineers, technicians, and even competitors. Thus it is extremely 
important in resolving the communication issue to identify accurately not only those who 
consume and buy the product but also those who influence its purchase. 

Detennining exactly what to say to the relevant audience is the fourth consideration. 
The heart of IMC is the transmission of ideas of marketing significance to the seller. Whether 
these ideas are received and perceived as intended depends in large part on the skill used 
in developing the communication appeal. It also depends upon the vehicle used to deliver 



196 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



Awareness 



Recall 



T 



Recognition 

~1~ 



Knowledge 



Understanding 



T 



Attitude change 

I 



intention to act 



Trial 



T 



Purchase 



Repurchase 



Commitment 



FIGURE 8.4 Goals of integrated marketing communication 



the message. Whether it is the message delivered by a salesperson, a newspaper, or a point- 
of-purchase display, the message must facilitate reaching the communication objectives. 

Money is always an important factor; a typical IMC effort is extremely expensive and 
is becoming more expensive every day. Keeping track of these cost elements is a full-time 
job. The budget for a particular IMC effort can be determined through very sophisticated 
computer programs or through intuitive techniques such as experience, following compe- 
tition, or simply spending all you can afford. Particular budgetary approaches are summa- 
rized in Table 8.1. 

Once you decide how much to spend, the amounts to be spent on personal selling, 
advertising, publicity, and sales promotion must be decided. After determining the major 
allocations, each of these figures must be broken down into much finer increments. For exam- 
ple, the advertising budget must be reallocated by media category, then by specific media, 
and finally, by particular dates, times, issues, etc. 

Evaluating the effer:tiveness of an IMC effort is very important. Three tasks must be 
completed when one attempts to measure the results of IMC. First, standards for IMC effec- 
tiveness, such as retention and liking, must be established. This means that the market plan- 
ner must have a clear understanding of exactly what the communication is intended to 
accomplish. For measurement purposes, the standards should be identified in specific, quan- 
titative terms. Second, actual IMC performance must be monitored. To do this, it is usu 
ally necessary to conduct experiments in which the effects of other variables are either 
excluded or controlled. The third step in measuring IMC efficiency is to compare these per- 



DESIGNING AN I Me STRATEGY 



197 



TABLE 8.1 Summary of Techniques: Setting the IMC Budget 



Technique 



General Description 



Arbitrary Allocation 

Affordability 
Ratio-to-sales 
Competitive comparisons 
Experimental approach 
Objective-task method 



Management bases budget on personal experience, business philosophy, and 

marketing intuition 
Upper limit of budget based on available company resources 
Amount budgeted is based on some portion of past or forecasted sales 
Budget based on amount being spent by major competitors 
Budget based on test market results 
Determine costs of reaching specific promotional objectives and sum amounts 



fonnance measures against the standards. I n doing so, it is theoretically possible to deter- 
mine the most effective methods of marketing communication. 

Finally, how a company organizes for IMC depends on the degree to which it desires 
to perfonn the communication function internally or to assign this task to outside agencies. 
Typically, the sales function is perfonned internally and the sales organization is a part of 
the overall, standing organizational plan. Occasionally, as when manufacturer's agents are 
used, outside organizations are employed to perfonn personal selling. Advertising services 
might be perfonned internally or externally. Sales promotion activities are usually also han- 
dled internally, although it is not uncommon for advertising agencies to be consulted in con- 
nection with sales promotion plans. The same is true for public relations. 



The Promotion Mix 

The manner in which the four components of IMC (i.e., advertising, personal selling, sales 
promotion, public relations) are combined into an effective whole is called the fMC mix. 
The promotion mix tends to be highly customized. While, in general, we can conclude that 
business-to-business marketers tend to emphasize personal selling and sales promotion over 
advertising and public relations, and that mass marketers are just the opposite, there are 
many exceptions. However, the following factors tend to have an impact on the particular 
IMC mix a company might select: 

1. Marketing/fMC objectives: Companies that desire broad market coverage or quick 
growth in market share, for example, must emphasize mass advertising in order 
to create a dramatic and simultaneous impact. 

2. Nature of the product: The basic characteristics of product (highly technical) sug- 
gest the need for demonstration and explanation through personal selling, or mass 
advertising in the case of a product with emotional appeal (perfume) . 

3. Place in the product lifecycle: Products in the introductory stage in the life cycle 
often need mass advertising and sales promotion, those in maturity need personal 
selling, and those in decline employ sales promotion. 

4. Available resources: Companies with limited financial and human resources are 
often restricted to sales promotion and public relations while those with plenty 
of both opt for mass advertising and personal selling. 2 

The most striking fact about IMC techniques is their cross-substitutability. They rep- 
resent alternate ways to influence buyers to increase their purchases. It is possible to achieve 
a given sales level by increasing advertising expenditures or personal selling, or by offering 



1 98 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



a deal to the trade or a deal to customers. This substitutability calls for treating the various 
IMC tools in ajoint-decision framework. 

The Campaign 

Determining what particular devices to use and how to combine them in order to achieve 
IMC objectives is one of the greatest challenges facing the communication planner. Ordi- 
narily, managementjust make use of the campaign concept. A campaign is a planned, coor- 
dinated series of marketing communication efforts built around a single theme or idea and 
designed to reach a predetermined goal. Although the term "campaign" is probably thought 
of most often in connection with advertising, it seems appropriate to apply the concept of 
a campaign to the entire IMC program. 

Many types of IMC campaigns may be conducted by a company, and several may be 
run concurrently. Geographically, a firm may have a local, regional, or national campaign, 
depending uponthe available funds, objectives, and market scope. One campaign may be 
aimed at consumers and another at wholesalers and retailers. 

A campaign revolves around a theme, a central idea or focal point. This theme per- 
meates all IMC efforts and tends to unify the campaign. A theme is simply the appeals devel- 
oped in a manner considered unique and effective. As such, it is related to the campaign's 
objectives and the customer's behavior. It expresses the product's benefits. Frequently the 
theme takes the form of a slogan, such as Coca-Cola's "Coke is it!" Or DeBeers' "A dia- 
mond is forever." Some companies use the same theme for several campaigns; others develop 
a different theme for each new campaign. 

In a successfully operated campaign, the efforts of all groups concerned will be meshed 
effectively. The advertising program will consist of a series of related, well-timed, care- 
fully placed ads. The personal selling effort can be tied in by having the salesperson explain 
and demonstrate the product benefits stressed in ads. Also, the sales force will be fully 
informed about the advertising part of the campaign-the theme, media used, schedule of 
appearance of ads, appeals used, etc. The sales force will also inform the middlemen, i.e., 
wholesalers and retailers, about this campaign, and convince them to incorporate it into their 
total marketing effort. Sales promotional devices will be coordinated with the other aspects 
of the campaign. For each campaign, new display materials must be prepared, reflecting 
the ads and appeals used in the current campaign, in order to maximize the campaign's impact 



l*3M 



Marketing communication: g. Measure results 

a. Is intended to be persuasive h. Organize 

b. Has internal and external flows 

3. Factors that most impact the IMC mix include: 

The following steps are involved in designing an IMC a. Marketing/IMC objectives 

strategy: b. Nature of the product 

a. Determine objectives c. Place in the product lifecycle 

b. Determine IMC opportunities d. Available resources 

c. Select audience(s) 

, c i t / \ 4. A campaign is a planned, coordinated series of marketing 
u. oeiect message^sj _ _ 

e. Determine budget 

f. Allocate funds 



communication effOlls built around a single theme or idea 
and designed to reach a predetermined goal. 



UNDERSTANDING ADVERTISING 1 99 

at the point of sale. Personnel responsible for the physical distribution activities must ensure 
that adequate stocks of the product are available in all outlets prior to the start of the cam- 
paign. Finally, people working in public relations must be constantly kept aware of new 
products, product demonstrations, new product applications, and so forth. Of course, it is 
extremely important to provide enough lead time so that the public relations effort can take 
advantage of optimum timing. 



UNDERSTANDING ADVERTISING 



Undoubtedly, advertising is the promotional element that most consumers feel they know 
the best and hold strong opinions about. This is a result of the visibility and intrusiveness 
of advertising. In fact, most people have little understanding of advertising. 

The Organization of Advertising 

There are within the advertising industry a wide variety of means by which advertising is 
created and placed in media. At one extreme, an individual might write and place his own 
classified advertisements in a newspaper in the hope of selling his daughter's canopy bed. 
At the other extreme, the advertiser employs a full-service advertising agency to create and 
place the advertisement, retaining only the function of final approval of plans developed 
by that agency. Significant specialization is developed within the full-service advertising 
agency to discourage clients from hiring any outside vendors or other parties to perform 
any of the various fupctions involved in planning and executing advertising programs for 
the various advertisers that the agency serves. Another organizational possibility is a full- 
scale, in-house advertising department. This department may have total responsibility for 
all aspects of the advertisement, or some of the tasks might be optioned out to ad agencies 
or other types of specialty organizations, e.g., production, talent, media placement. It is not 
unusual for a large corporation to employ all of these possibilities or to use different agen- 
cies for different products or for different parts of the country. 

•.Vhether or not the advertiser uses an advertising agency, does his adveltising in-house, 
or uses some combination of the two depends upon a host of factors unique to each organ- 
ization: available funds, level of expertise, expediency, and so forth. Regardless of the influ- 
encing factors, a number of basic functions must be performed by someone if creative and 
effective advertisements are to be placed: 

s What products, institutions, or ideas are to be advertised 

• Who is to prepare advertising programs 

• Who the organiLation engages and gives oolicy and other direction to the adver- 
tising agency, if any agency is used 

• Who in the organization has the authority to develop advertising work ancl/or approves 
the advertising programs presented by the advertising agency 

• Who pays the advertising bill 

• Who determines the extent to which advertisements help reach the stated objectives 3 

The Advertising Department 

A company advertising department can range from a one-person department to one employ- 
ing 500 or more people. Regardless of the size, advertising departments share similar 
responsibilities: 



200 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



1. Formulating the advertising program 

2. Implementing the program 

3. Controlling the program 

4. Presenting the budget 

5. Maintaining relationships with suppliers 

6. Establishing internal communications 

7. Setting professional standards 

8. Selecting an advertising agency 

The Advertising Agency 

The relations between an advertising agency and a client can go on for years, although some 
clients do move from agency to agency. Firms such as DuPont, Procter & Gamble, Kraft, 
Kellogg, and General Mills rarely change agencies. 

Clients employ advertising agencies because they believe that the agency can: (1 ) pro- 
duce better-quality, more persuasive messages for their products; and (2) place these mes- 
sages in the right media so that the message reaches the greater number of prospects. Clients 
who believe they can do better themselves set up their own in-house agencies. However, 
relatively few of them exist and these are in specialized fields such as retailing. 

Developing the Creative Strategy 

Once all the relevant facts are gathered and evaluated, the process of actually creaiing the 
advertisement is appropriate. This process is very complex, and a complete description of 
it is well beyond the scope of this book. However, it is possible to highlight the primary 
parts of this process. 

To begin with, the person or persons actually responsible for the complete advertisement 
depends upon the advertiser's organization of the advertising function and whether an adver- 
tising agency is used. More thar likely, the development and approval of advertising cre- 
ation is the responsibility of the senior advertising manager within the advertiser company 
and, when an advertising agency is used, of the agency management. In most agencies, the 
responsibility is that of the senior account person, in conjunction with the senior creative 
person assigned to the account. The advertising effort can be divided into two elements: 
the creative strategy and creative tactics. The creative strategy concerns what you are going 
to say to the audience. It flows from the advertising objectives and should outline what impres- 
sions the cajlpaign should convey to the target audience. Creative tactics outline tile means 
for catTying out the creative strategy. This includes al! the various alternatives avai;able, 
which will help reach the advertising objective ,. 

The place to begin the creative strategy is to ascertain the proper appeal to employ 
in the ad. (See Table 8.2.) Identifying the appropriate appeal is j ust the first part of the adver- 
tising design process. The second part is to transform this idea into an actual advertisement 
To say that there are a large variety of ways to do this would be a gross understatement. 
The number of techniques available to the creative strategist are not only vast, but the abil- 
ity of more than one technique to successfully operatioaalize the same appeal makes this 
process even:TIore nebulous. 



UNDERSTANDING ADVERTISING 



201 



TABLE 8.2 Primary Advertising Appeals 



Product/service featu res 
Product/competitive advantage 

Product/service price advantage 
News about product/service 

Product/service popularity 
Generic approach 
Consumer service 
Savings through use 
Self-enhancement 
Embarrassment or anxiety 
Product trial 
Corporate 



Many products have such strong technology or performance capabilities that these 

features can serve as a primary advertising appeal. 
When an advertiser can determine that his product is superior, either in terms of 

features, performance, supporting services, or image, emphasizing a competitive 

advantage has proved to be a successful appeal. 
Offering a product at a reduced price or under some special deal arrangement (e.g., 

buy-one-get-one-free) may be the only viable appeal in a particular ad. 

There are times when a truly new product is developed, or when an existing product 

is changed or improved in a substantial manner, that highlighting this single 

element is the core appeal. 
Although the manner varies, the notion of claiming that a product is "number one" 

or the most popular is an appeal that has been around for a long time, 
In such advertising, a product or service category is promoted for its own sake, but 

individual makes or brands of product are not singled out. 
A popular appeal is to illustrate through the advertisement how the product may be 

used to best serve the needs of the consumer, 
An opportunity to save time, money, or energy is always very appealing to 

consumers. 
Helping us feel better about ourselves (e.g., personal care, clothing, automobiles) is 

an appeal that many people can't resist. 
Situations that represent a threatening situation, either physically or socially, can 

provide the basis for an effective appeal. 
When this appeal is used, the advertiser offers a free sample, a price reduction, or 

some other purchase incentive to encourage consumer use or trial. 
This type of appeal presents a company or corporation in a favorable light in order 

to create a favorable impression or image. 



Developing the Media Plan 

Although the media plan is placed later in this process, it is in fact developed simultane- 
ously with the creative strategy. This area of advertising has gone through tremendous 
changes; a critical media revolution has taken place. 

The standard media plan consists of four stages: (I) stating media objectives; (2) eval- 
uating media; (3) selecting and implementing media choices; and (4) determining the media 
budget. 

Stating Media Objectives 

Media objectives are normally started in terms of three dimensions: 

1 . Reach- number of different persons or households exposed to a particular media 
vehicle or media schedule at least once during a specified time period. 

2. Frequency-the number of times within a given time period that a consumer is 
exposed to a message. 

3. Continuity -the timing of media assertions (e.g., 10% in September, 20% in Octo- 
ber, 20% in November, 40% in December and 10% the rest of the year). 



202 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



Evaluating Media 

As noted in Table 8.3, there are definite inherent strengths and weaknesses associated with 
each medium. In addition, it would require extensive primary research either by the spon- 
soring firm or their advertising agency in order to assess how a particular message and the 
target audience would relate to a given medium. As a result, many advertisers rely heavily 
on the research findings provided by the medium, by their own experience and by sub- 
jective appraisal. 

Selection and Implementation 

The media planner must make media mix decisions and timing directions, both of which 
are restricted by the available budget. The media mix decision involves putting media together 
in the most effective manner. This is a difficult task, and necessitates quantitatively and qual- 
itatively evaluating each medium and combination thereof. 

Unfortunately, there are very few valid rules of thumb to guiae this process, and the 
supporting research is spotty at best. For example, in attempting to compare audiences of 
various media, we find that A.C. Nielsen measures audiences based on TV viewer reports 
of the programs watched, while outdoor audience exposure estimates are based on counts 
of the number of automobile vehicles that pass particular outdoor poster locations. The tim- 
ing afmedia refers to the actual placement of advertisements during the time periods that 
are most appropriate, given the selected media objectives. It includes not only the sched- 
uling of advertisements, but also the size and position of the advertisement 4 

Determining the Media Budget 

This budget is a part of the advertising budget, and the same techniques and factors that 
apply to the advertising budget apply to the media budget as well. 

Banner Advertisements 

Before leaving the topic of advertising, both creative and media, it is important to intro- 
duce a new form of advertising-banner advertising. Banner ads are the dominant form of 
online advertising. Banner ads are graphic images in Web pages that are often animated 
and can include small pieces of software code to allow further interaction. Most importantly, 
they are "clickable," and take a viewer to another Web location when chosen. 

Banner ads typically run at the top and bottom of the page, but they can be incorpo- 
rated anywhere. The CAS1E organization has developed a small number of standard sizes 
and formats. Like the Web itself, banner ads are a mixture of approaches, with elements of 
traditional print advertising and more targeted direct advertising. Banner ads include direct 
marketing capabilities. Each banner carries with it a unique identifier. This allows the Web 
site to track the effectiveness of the ad in generating traffic. Measurability permits ad ban- 
ner pricing based on results and behavior. Click-through pricing ignores impressions and 
charges the advertiser based on the number of viewers that select the ad and follow it to 
the linking Web site. 

Admittedly, the performance of banner ads to date has been less than stellar. One com- 
pany, San Francisco-based Organic, has approached the problem of ineffective online adver- 
tising with a product called "expand-o." This new ad vehicle allows an advertiser to include 
some of its Web site's content in an expandable banner ad. At the click of amouse, the adver- 
tisement expands to as much as five or six times its original size. For instance, an expand-o 



UNDERSTANDING ADVERTISING 



203 



TABLE 8.3 An Appraisal of Mass Media 



Type 



Strengths 



Weaknesses 



TELEVISION 



1. Strong emotional impact 

2. Mass coverage/small cost per impression 

3. Repeat message 

4. Creative flexibility 

5. Entertaining/prestigious 



1. High costs 

2. High clutter (too many ads) 

3. Short-lived impression 

4. Programming quality 

5. Schedule inflexibility 



RADIO 



1. Provides immediacy 

2. Low cost per impression 

3. Highly flexible 



1. Limited national coverage 

2. High clutter 

3. Less easily perceived durinc 
drive time 

4. Fleeting message 



NEWSPAPERS 



1. Flexibility 

2. Community prestige 

3. Market coverage 

4. Offer merchandising services 

5. Reader involvement 



1. Short life 

2. Technical quality 

3. Clutter 

4.Timing flexibility 

5. Two-tiered rate structure 



MAGAZINES 



1. Highly segmented audiences 

2. High-profile audiences 

3. Reproduction qualities 

4. Prestigious 

5. Long life 

6. Extra services 



1. Inflexible 

2. Narrow audiences 

3. Waste circulation 

4. High cost 



OUTDOORI 
TRANSIT 



1. Inexpensive 

2. Flexible 

3. Reminder 

4. Repetition 

5. Immediacy 



1. Short/concise messages 

2. Negative reputation 

3. Uncontrollable 

4. Inflexible 



DIRECT MAIL 



1. Flexibility 

2. Develop complete/precise message 

3. Supplement 



1. Negative image 

2. High cost per impression 

3. High production costs 

4. Dependent upon mailing list 



SPECIALTY 
ADVERTISING 
(Directories, matchbooks, 
calendars, etc.) 



1. Positive reinforcement 

2. Segmented markets 

3. Flexible 



1. Wasteful 

2. Expensive 



INTERACTIVE 



1. Flexible 

2. Repetition 

3. Involvement 



1. Hard to measure 

2. Limited market coverage 

3. Uncontrollable 



204 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



for Fort Washington, PA-based CDNow provides consumers with a sample of dynamically 
updated content housed on the music retailer's site. When the consumer clicks an arrow on 
the ad, it expands to show the top 10 songs in CDNow's top 100 Billboard Charts 



SALES PROMOTION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 



For several years, sales promotion and public relations have been often misunderstood, inis- 
measured, and lnisused by a great many marketers. Unlike advertising and personal sell- 
ing that can claim fonnal structures and point to obvious accomplishments, sales promotion 
and PR have neither. Although this situation is changing somewhat, there is still a great 
deal of room for improvement. In the case of sales promotion, there exists some confusion 
as to which activities actually fall under this heading. Are packaging, couponing, and point- 
of-purchase displays all sales promotion? Because the answer to this question varies from 
organization to organization and across situations, sales promotion is often viewed as a catch- 
all category that includes everything that an organization does not label advertising or pub- 
lic relations . 

Public relations, too, is difficult to define as it deals with the ultimate intangible- 
creating a positive image of the company. Not only is this difficult to accomplish, but it is 
also virtually impossible to ascertain if you have succeeded and to what extent. An organ- 
ization, for instance, might sponsor a free barbecue for a Fourth of July celebration and 
never really know if the money spent produced additional business. Management has a dif- 
ficult time appreciating an activity that produces indirect results. 

Sales Promotion: A Little Bit of Everything 

As the newest member of the promotional team, sales promotion has sllffered from a seri- 
ous identity crisis. For example, initially the American Marketing Association defines sales 
promotion as, "marketing activities, other than personal selling, advertising, and publicity, 
that stimulate consumer purchasing and dealer effectiveness, such as displays, shows and 
exhibitions, demonstrations, and various non-recurrent selling efforts not in the ordinary 
routine ."6 In the AMA view, sales promotion supplements both personal selling and adver- 
tising, coordinates them, and helps make them more effective ."However, this does not pro- 
vide an accurate portrayal of the role played by sales promotion. A simple way of viewing 
sales promotion is to say that it means special offers: special in the sense that they are extra 
as well as specific in time or place; offers in the sense that they are direct propositions, the 
acceptance of which fonns a deal. Simply, it increases the perceived value of the product. 

As in most aspects of marketing, the rationale of sales promotion is to provide a direct 
stimulus to produce a desired response by customers. It is not always clear, however, what 
the distinctions are between sales promotion and advertising, personal selling and public 
relations. For example, suppose that Pillsbury decides to tape three cans of their buttennilk 
canned biscuits together and sell them for a price slightly cheaper than the three sold indi- 
vidually. Is that a branded multipack special offer and therefore promotional? Or is it just 
an example of a giant-sized economy pack, and therefore a product or packaging tactic? In 
order to sort out which it is, the question has to be asked, is it intended to be a permanent 
feature of the manufacturer's product policy to have the family pack as a component of the 
product? I f it is not, it is a sales promotion scheme. 

The same sort of problem comes up when studying strategies run by firms in serv- 
ice industries. If a hotel offers cut-price accommodations at off-peak times of the year, is 
it a feature of the hotel management's pricing policy or is it a promotional tactic? If the 



SALES PROMOTION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 205 






3#S 



Slay at Days n. 







DAYS INN 



GETAFREF 
CD-ROM MME! 

Pay wffli the American Express Cam. 




3 ' i£ WSJ™™- ■•! 



V : .£ f r.VUt. 




10ISECOID 
IAME FREE!! 




HtB SONUS Gffn MA imnbers 

also get a free 20-mlmile AT&T 
PrePalfl Phone nil 









Stay at any Days Inn hotel between January 1 and May 15, 3001. get sn order form, choose one of the eight Hasbro 
Interactive CD-ROM games shewn and mail the aider lorin with your room receipt. Pay for yen 
American Express ' Card and get a second (res CO -ROM game! Choose from Wheel of fortune , Jeopardy!', 
Fragger*, Risk if, Torts' Construction 2, PAC-MAN ' AcVetuures in Time ", Aian r Arcade Hits, or /^^^X 
Oattfesh if>: So rtece Thunder,' / 

Book your room at 1-800-DAYS IHH or daySiflD.COm [DAYSINN 



iMppk*9 Hid h irrtlm chargm 'nt 



There you go. 



AD 8.1 Here's an excellent example of a sales promotion. 

hotel management provides price reductions on tickets to local theaters for their guests, is 
it part of the product or is it a device to attract customers for a limited period only? Again, 
the answer can only be given once the quesiion about performance is asked. Even then, 
there still lend to be elements of advertising, personal selling, public relations and sales 
promotion in many promotional vehicles, and this may be the right approach. A candy 



206 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



June 3 - June" 30 




OVER 





i 


^i 


1 










1 


■ 


KTE 


L 




* 



IN TOTAL SAVINGS 



77 

REBATES 

14 124 




INSTANT 
COUPONS 



Check 



AD 8.2 Example of a rebate offer. 



manufacturer, for instance, has made substantial contributions of both cash and products 
to the local heart fund telethon . Immediately following the telethon, they run a full-page 
ad in several magazines describing their contributions, and describing a;pecial rebate of 
50 for every candy wrapper mailed in. The 50 can be donated to the heart fund if the cus- 
tomer wishes. The sales reps also have copies of this promotion to show their customers. 
Clearly, this strategy has all four components of the IMe mix. 



SALES PROMOTION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 



207 



Types of Sales Promotion 

There are a great many techniques that are considered sales promotion. One way of organ- 
izing this myriad of techniques is in terms of audience. As shown in Table 8.4, sales pro- 
motions are directed at consumers, employees, and distributors, and dealers. While consumers 
attract the greatest number of sales promotion devices, the other two audiences are grow- 
ing in importance. While space does not permit a discussion of these strategies, some gen- 
eralizations apply to all. Specifically, the value of a sales promotion is especially prominent 
when a marketer is introducing a new product, especially a product with high perceived 
risk; is interested in creating a repeat purchase pattern for the customer; is attempting to 
create movement of large amounts of products quickly ; is attempting to counter the strat- 
egy of a competitor; and is trying to move marginal customers to make a choice. Sales pro- 
motion cannot compensate for a poor product or ineffective advertising. Nor can it create 
strong brand loyalty or reverse a declining sales trend . 

Public Relations: The Art of Maintaining Goodwill 

Every organization engages in some form of public relations (PR) . I n essence, every form 
of communication emitted by an organization both internally and externally is perceived 
by various publics. In turn, these publics form attitudes and opinions about that organiza- 
tion, which affect their behaviors. These behaviors range from low morale on the part of 
the employees to product rejection on the part of consumers . 



>■ ImWHHWHWW 1WWIW1 Ml- " ■.■HyiWU'tT'iWMhiMttiil 



<5iH9mamiapiuir 



J *.(«tl. .*'^g j| ^5»<h CS.Fi.OM5 iJttWxv [%. & .g|." . gf TS 

--— — ~— y|]_- ■ —--■■-- -- ■ — .-..■.,,■■ ,,.,,,... . -- 1 -.-., c —- 



' WKMoa* (^ TVTKMlt:flSrLl ®Wv v * l 'tt> - TfWtfUW ^Fwffl.' E^Y'Mai * £?r*w5 » ,|p Ettffltfig 




U'lKltWl V i» * plftwr* Of. »r f*!-£L • ptmplt ^dKhCfil 

Senna SmQoth Mint Mnuthwash O 2. of * b •*<*** tad. 

Ttw77lflra Tvyiste 

Shout Wjp es Sla 

Sloli! Savars Lens Cleaners 

QfiMB ! Enhancer 

"ff-.-iy Lnhiincc-r 

Downy Enhancer 

USmSi Enhancer 

Baskin Robbins Candy 

7,f>$\ Rnrivwash 

fiuakPf Cdspv Mini's : f h gfjd^f 

Gri d Cheese mi Captain's Wafers^ 

S'mQres m-i NekrittftCQQkies 

Uvaker Cris pv Mini'<; .- f.jfrflmft l 

Major GtPV's Chutney 

Fi.iirjn iRisollo 

r^gjgS Kxlrcme fTarfl ™ 
Safeayard Antihartarial C iaths 
COv North 14- MnvSjiTirkot 
ISJPStl6 European Slvls MnusfisMJK 
Grosse A Rlar.kftjtf Cocktail Onions 



$2 of 4 bjltdvij laday 

2of3bateh«* today 
1 of 3 batch** today 



2 of 4 bitch** today 

2 of 4 batch*? today 

O 2 of 4 b*«h*i today 



g m fip v snql IviTi ■ s 



it ;-"■;""■ 

a;a«rt|i:a]gi3i 



glrtex .i*?flHfi Outlet 



jSi 



WHc- W nn[H,St.T^j^... 



MiNlontti 



&« 



[Jl ■ laktaS 



>- 



Kids' Internet Book 



AD 8.3 StartSampling offers its more than 1.5 million members the chance to try a 
wide variety of samples while helping marketers more effectively connect with their 
target audience. 



208 



CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



* «t Q 4 A S) .0 <ft e| A a" # ® <& 

£ &Kk Forward Stop R*fr**h Horf& Favorites History Starch Aui.oFNi Largw Smarter Print M«ji Pr*f$r*ncM 



! FreeSanipleSrCom 



~^r 



Martsi : g . iht^y/«^rfr<«lTOt»I.«m /rt w/StWJtoaMWvi^fc^>iSCF<C»4223a415acFTi>;tH-5524Sai3 ~ 1 [tf> Go] . C%~J 



ftee$amafe$ 



• What lr FrovS*VfiplvF.£#m? 



icsEaalcacEHsa 



JUy £»mf**ft*x™ 










(empty) 




© 


&4ntf atawnptea 



Fun for fr»e taking. 



Hi fclyse. We have a Solo Sample available that you can 
orderright now. Please choose from the Featured 
Samples or explore our Sample Categories. 



F eatured sample s 




««npto &«»»«■)»« 



AUTOMOTIVE 
8BAUTY 
CAMDY « Ol/U 

mmrxwMENr 

FOOO * SEV 

rem tour kids 

HOUSEHOLD 
MMSOHAL CAM 



AD 8.4 Both StartSampling and FreeSamples.com have systems in place to prevent inven- 
tory depletion. 



Nevertheless, public relations looms as one of the most misunderstood and mistrusted 
elements in marketing. Consequently, management may provide marketing in general with 
full support, ample scope, and time for planning, but often does not establish a role for pub- 
lic relations. Public relations may be brought in belatedly at advanced stages of marketing 
process as a peripheral area with no real purpose. 

Obtaining a good working definition of public relations requires an acknowledgement 
of the concept's core elements. Four such elements emerge. First, the ultimate objective of 
PR is to retain as well as create goodwill. Second, the successful procedure to follow in 
public relations is to first do good, and then take credit for it. Third, the publics addressed 
by the PR program must be described completely and precisely. In most instances, PR pro- 
grams are aimed at multiple publics that have varying points of view and needs. Conse- 
quently, the publics served should be researched just as carefully as the target audiences 
for an advertising campaign. Finally, public relations is a planned activity. There is an intel- 
ligence behind it. 

The definition that encompasses all these considerations, and was coined at the First 
Assembly of Public Relations Associations in 1987, follows: 



Public Relations practice is the art of social science in analyzing trends, predicting 
their consequences, counseling organization leaders, and implementing planned pro- 
grams of action, which serve both the organizations and the public interest. 7 



SALES PROMOTION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 



209 



TABLE 8.4 Types of Sales Promotion Techniques 



Audience/Technique 



Description 



CONSUMER 

Price Discounts 
Coupon offers 
Combination offers 
Contests 
Rebates 
Premiums 
Trading stamps 
Sampling 



Temporary reduction in price, often at point of purchase. 

Certificates redeemable for amount specified. 

Selling two products in conjunction at a lower total price. 

Awarding of prizes on the basis of chance or consideration. 

Refund of a fixed amount of money. 

Tangible reward received for performing an act, normally a purchase. 

Certificate awarded based on purchase amount. 

Providing the product either free or for a small fee. 



EMPLOYEE 

Orientation program 
Fringe benefits 
Institutional promotion 
Motivational programs 



Introducing \he employee to company facts. 
Extra incentives provided by company to employee. 
Messages portraying company in a positive light. 
Temporary incentives, e.g., contests, prizes, or awards. 



DISTRIB UTOR/DEALER 

Contests 

Trade shows 

Push money/dealer loaders 

Trade deals 



Temporary incentives offered for specific performance. 
Central location where products are displayed/sold. 
Money offered for selling specified amounts of product. 
Dealers receive special allowances, discounts, goods, or cash. 



Public Relation's Publics 

A public may be said to exist whenever a group of people is drawn together by definite inter- 
ests in certain areas and has definite opinions upon matters within those areas. There are mallY 
publics, and individuals are frequently members of several that may sometimes have conflicting 
interests. For example, in the case of a school bond vote, a voter might be torn between feel- 
ings as a parent and as a member of a conservative economic group opposed to higher taxes; 
or an elderly couple, with no children now in school, might be parents of a teacher. 

Public relations must be sensitive to two general types of publics: internal and exter- 
nal. Internal publics are the people who are already connected with an organization, and 
with whom the organization normally communicates in the ordinary routine of work. Typ- 
ical internal publics in an industry are the employees, stockholders, suppliers, dealers, cus- 
wmers, and plant neighbors. For example, employees want good wages and working 
conditions, opportunities for advancement, and a secure retirement. Customers want a depend- 
able supply of quality products provided at a fair price and supported by convenient serv- 
ices. Stakeholders want dividends, growth, and a fair return on their investments. 

External publics are composed of people who are not necessarily closely connected 
with a particular organization. For example, members of the press, educators, government 
officials, or the clergy mayor may not have an interest in an industry. The leaders of the 
industry cannot assume any automatic interest and, to some extent, must choose whether 
to communicate with these groups. 



21 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 




It's the second largest state in America,, 
And every resident is struggling to get out 

It's bigge r than Texas, Florida or New York- but you won't find it on any map. it holds more people 
than Connecticut, Kentucky, Maryland, Michigan, New Jersey and Nevada combined- but it's a 
state of bitter uncertainty It's ho me to one out of every eleven families in America. It's hometo one 
out of every six children in America . It's hometo more than 32 million desperate people trapped within 
its cruel boundaries. It's the state of poverty in America . And if you were poor, you'd be home by now. 

POVERTY. 

Ansrics's forfanss state. 

Catholic Campaign for Human Owelopment ;*£^« 

t-800-346-4243 ;flp 

www.poviutYUSs.arg ,"«« *J 

AD 8.5 The Cathol ;c Campaign for Human Development is hoping to convey the message 
that one in nine Americans lives below the poverty line. 



There is, of course, interaction between internal and external publics. Yet it cannot 
be assumed that good relations: with insiders will ever be translated to outsiders without 
effort. An employee who is quite happy on the job may be much more interested in bowl- 



SALES PROMOTION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 



211 



ing than in the fact that the firm has just opened a new branch in Phoenix. The firm must 
think of what interests the external public and not what interests the firm. With employees 
and other internal publics, there is a fair chance that all interests may coincide because all 
are connected with the same organization; with an external audience, the assumption should 
be that the chance of such accidental coincidence of interest is slight. 

Public Relations Techniques 

The public relations process is quite complex and involves a wide variety of techniques. 
Public relations is different than any other type of promotion, because a great deal of the 
communication provided by a PR person must be screened and reprocessed through a third 
party that is not employed by the company. Therefore, if 1 wished for the local newspaper 
and television station to carry a story detailing the grand opening of my new store, I have 
no guarantee that either will send representatives to cover the store opening or that they 
will cover it the way I would have liked. Even if I were to write the story myself and send 
it to the newspaper, including appropriate photographs, the editor might choose not to print 
it or to modify it. The fact that PR is characterized by a low level of control necessitates 
that PR people establish a positive relationship with the various media. Without first accom- 
plishing this goal, the tools employed by the PR person are usually doomed to failure. Var- 
ious public relations techniques are described in Table 8.5. 

Personal Selling and the 
Marketing Communication Mix 

Few companies coordinate marketing communication efforts in support of the sales force. 
Salespeople are often separated from marketing communications specialists because of both 
the structure of the business and difference in perspective. Most salespeople view other mar- 
keting communication activities strictly as a means to help sell a product or company. Adver- 
tisers, sales promotion managers, and public relations experts rarely consider the needs and 
suggestions of salespeople, and salespeople seldom pay attention to information about a 
marketing communication campaign. 



TABLE 8.5 Public RelationsTechniques 



TECHNIQUE 



DESCRIPTION 



News release (press release) 
Press conference 

Delivering bad news 
Publicity photographs 
Company publications 

Open houses/tours 
Meetings 

Organized social activities 

Participation 

Motion pictures/slides 



A prepared statement sent to various media. 

Meeting attended by media representatives for the purpose of making 

announcements or answering questions. 
System that anticipates and handles negative events. 
A prepared photo sent to various media. 
Magazines, newspapers, and newsletters produced by the company, depicting 

specific stories. 
Providing various publics' access to plant facilities. 
Planned meeting provided for various publics, especially employees and 

stockholders. 
Company-sponsored social activities directed at employees, e.g., teams and picnics. 
Company-encouraged involvement in community activities, e.g., clubs, charities. 
Professionally produced films and slides about some aspect of the company, 

provided to various publics. 



212 



CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



1. Advertising is the marketing communication technique that 
provides messages to mass audiences via a creative strat- 
egy and a media strategy. 

2. The organization for advertising may include an in-house 
advertising department or an external agency. 

3. The creative strategy includes what you are going to yay 
to the audience and the means for delivering the message. 



4. Sales promotion adds value to the product, and can be tar- 
geted at consumers, salespeople, or distributors. 

5. Public relations maintains or enhances goodwill with the 
company's various publics. 



Integrating personal selliig with other marketing communication elements may seri- 
ously affect that salesperson's job. Regis McKenna, international consultant, contends that 
although marketing technology has made salespeople more effective, it may also decrease 
the need for traditional salespeople who convince people to buy. As we move closer to "real- 
time" marketing, he believes customers and suppliers will be linked directly, so that cus- 
tomers can design their own products, negotiate price with suppliers, and discuss delivery 
and other miscellaneous concerns with producers rather than salespeople. McKenna sug- 
gests that the main role of salespeople will no longer be to "close" the sale. Instead it will 
be to carry detailed design, quality, and reliability information, and to educate and train 
clients. 8 

Don Schultz, Northwestern University professor of marketing and proponent of I Me, 
supports this notion of the modem salesperson. "If you create long-term affiliations, then 
you don't sell. You form relationships that help people buy." He observes that because prod- 
ucts have become more sophisticated, the businesses that buy are often smaller than those 
that sell. "Today, I think the sales force is primarily focused on learning about the product 



D MMtWaiHOOSEtWreEBUITdAHOinnAratricAProgr... 



B»fr*jh (tor* FtvflrHW Hklory §+^:lh fcrtalfm Lvftr Am*! In* Prml tttit Pl"*fih , Ml#w 



! 



*flttf«f . fr r f kite ijiVv yw Jcr 1 jJrVs •■£ ■■ .■.-■■.■ r.-\ ./■:;■, 



ALhtHenwftp A/WfrCtfflpriH- A,Apefc &*+*-( ^j|.A»:t Stir* Qk*l**ttt,flt MKfefiS* AnSft £j^0fK+ for MMtrtMft ^ht*rr«fl{Kp]a™- 



ni^UL! 




iUiiioett (Maflits, i*?ia»ug wti * j*ft »a4 rffonUife j!*c» l» **3J tbom-t ~ 



AD 8.6 This ad is typical of Institutional Public Relations advertising. 



SALES PROMOTION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 



213 



and not about the market. We're talking about flipping that around," he concludes. 9 In short, 
effective personal selling must focus on customer relationships. 

To integrate personal selling with other marketing communication tools to forge strong 
customer relationships, top management should lead the integration effort. Unless managers 
understand what salespeople do, however, integration may not be successful. Before con- 
sidering how to combine selling efforts with other marketing communication tools, we first 
examine the job of personal selling. 

The underlying rationale for personal selling is facilitating exchange. As suggested 
by a personal selling expert, it is "the art of successfully persuading prospects or customers 
to buy products or services from which they can derive suitable benefits, thereby increas- 
ing their total satisfaction." A professional salesperson recognizes that the long-term suc- 
cess for the organization depends on consistently satisfying the needs of a significant segment 
of its target market. This modem view of selling has been called "nonmanipulative sell- 
ing," and the emphasis of this view is that selling should build mutual trust and respect, between 
buyer and seller. Benefit must come to both parties. This perspective is developed further 
in the Integrated Marketing box that follows. 

Types of Selling 

Considerable differences exist in the various kinds of selling tasks. Early writers provided 
two-way classification of sellingjobs, consisting of service selling, which focuses on obtaining 



SELLING INVOLVES EVERYTHING 



Salespeople have been taught for years that the key to suc- 
cessful selling is finding out what people need and then doing 
whatever i t takes to fill that need. There are thousands of books 
and articles based on this principle alone. Recently, however, 
many sales professionals are discovering a better way to sell. 

The real definition of selling has to do with finding out 
what people or businesses do, where they do it, and why they 
do it that way, and then helping them to do it better. 

The word "need" doesn't appear in that definition at all, 
because there is no need associated with today's selling. A 
successful salesperson first asks the prospect about the com- 
pany's goals before trying to fill an imagined need with the 
product or service being sold. 

Critics of tills approach say that determining what a busi- 
ness does is the same as determining its needs. "It's all seman- 
tics," they say. "The word 'do' is the same as the word 'need'." 
But it's not semantics. There is a major difference in the new 
sales philosophy. 

What does the concept of need-driven sales really mean? 
For one thing, the word "need" implies that something is miss- 
ing. For example, if a car has only three wheels, there is a 
need for a fourth. The driver of the car realizes that some- 
thing is missing and stops at the nearest tire shop. 

A business generally has a full complement of tires, or 
needed items. Even if a business needs something, it does not 



want a salesperson to call. The needed service or items is 
bought as soon as the need is recognized. In a proactive sale, 
the business is running smoothly when the salesperson calls. 
The salesperson, having been trained in a needs-driven indus- 
try, asks the prospect what is missing. The buyer replies that 
nothing is needed. The salesperson insists that something must 
be wrong, and attempts to prove that there is a solution to the 
"pain" the business is experiencing. 

There are two possible outcomes to this scenario. The first 
is that no sale is made. The second is that the salesperson does 
uncover some deep-seated problem that can be fixed, and a 
sale is made. But this is an arduous process that pays off all 
too infrequently. 

The top competitor of salespeople today is the status quo. 
People continue to do what they do because it works. The 
salesperson is a messenger of change. He or she makes a sale 
by helping someone improve the way they do business. 

Sources: Stephan Schiffman, "Here's the Real Definition of Seil- 
ing," The Marketing News, December 8, 1997, pp. 4-5; Diana 
Ray, "Value-based Selling," Selling Power, September 1999, pp. 
30-33; Rochelle Garner, "The Ties That Bind," Sales & Marketing 
Management, October 1999, pp. 71-74. 



214 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 

Factor Personal Selling Mass Selling 

Speed in a Large Audience Slow Fast 

Cost per Individual Reached High Low 

Ability to Attract Attention High Low 

Clarity of Communications High Moderate 

Chance of Selective Screening Moderate High 

Direction of Message Flow Two Way One Way 

Speed of Feedback High Low 

Accuracy of Feedback High Low 

FIGURE 8.5 Differences in personal selling and mass promotion 



sales from existing customers, and developmental selling, which is not as concerned with 
immediate sales as with converting prospects to customers. 

Most sales positions require some degree of both types of selling. Sales jobs can be 
classified on a continuum of service selling at one end to developmental selling at the other. 
Nine types of sales jobs are classified on this continuum (see Figure 8.6). 

Service selling involves the following participants: 

1. Inside order taker-predominantly waits on customer; for example, the sales clerk 
behind the neckwear counter in a men's store. 

2. Delivery salesperson-predominately engaged in delivering the product; for exam- 
ple, persons delivering milk, bread, or fuel oil. 

3. Route or merchandising salesperson-predominantly an order taker, but works 
in the field; for example, the soap or spice salesperson calling on retailers. 

4. Missionary salesperson-position where the salesperson is not expected or per- 
mitted to take an order but to build goodwill or to educate the actual or potential 
user; for example, the distiller's missionary and the pharmaceutical company's detail 
person. 



Low Level of Complexity 



Service selling: 

• Inside order taker 

• Delivery salesperson 

• Route or merchandising salesperson 

• Missionary salesperson 

• Technical salesperson 

Developmental selling: 

• Creative salesperson of tangibles 

• Creative salesperson of intangibles 

Developmental selling requiring high degree of creativity: 

• Indirect salesperson 

• Salesperson engaged in multiple sales 



High Level of Complexity 
FIGURE 8.6 A continuum of personal selling positions 



SALES PROMOTION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 215 

5. Technical salesperson-major emphasis is placed upon technical knowledge; 
for example, the engineering salesperson who is primarily a consultant to client 
companies. 

Developmental selling involves the following participants: 

1. Creative salesperson o/tangibles-for example, salespersons selling vacuum clean- 
ers, refrigerators, siding, and encyclopedias. 

2. Creative salesperson o/intangibles-for example, salespersons selling insurance, 
advertising services, and educational programs. 

Developmental selling, but requiring a high degree of creativity, involves the following 
participants: 

1. Indirect salesperson-involves sales of big ticket items, particularly of commodities 
or items that have no truly competitive features. Sales consummated primarily 
through rendering highly-personalized services to key decision-makers in cus- 
tomers' organizations. 

2. Salesperson engaged in multiple sales-involves sales of big-ticket items where 
the salesperson must make presentations to several individuals in the customer's 
organization, usually a committee, only one of whom can say yes, but all of whom 
can say no. For example, the account executive of an advertising agency who makes 
presentation to the agency selection committee. Even after the account is obtained, 
the salesperson generally has to work continually to retain it. 

While the developmental-service and oriented classifications are helpful to better our 
understanding of the selling job, there are several other traditional classifications. 

Inside Versus Outside Selling Inside selling describes those sales situations in which 
selling takes place in the salesperson's place of business. Retail selling is inside selling. 
Outside selling represents situations in which the salesperson travels to the customer's place 
of business. Most industrial selling situations fall into this category. 

Company Salespeople Versus Manufacturer Representatives A manufacturer's 
representative is an independent agent who handles the related products of noncompeting 
firms. Generally, these agents are used by new firms or firms that have little selling expert- 
ise. Company salespeople work for a particular company and sell only the product manu- 
factured by that company. 

Direct Versus Indirect Selling Indirect selling is characterized by situations in 
which people in the marketing channel are contacted who can influence the purchase of a 
product. This type of selling occurs in the pharmaceutical industry in which detail sales- 
people call on physicians in an effort to convince them to prescribe their firm's brand of 
drugs. Direct salespeople call on the person who makes the ultimate purchase decision. 

The Selling Process 

To better understand the job of a salesperson and how it should be managed, the selling 
process can be broken into a series of steps. Each step in the process may not be required 
to make every sale, but the salesperson should become skilled in each area in case it is needed . 
The steps are shown in Figure 8.7. 



21 6 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



Prospecting 



Preapproach 



Planning the presentation 



Delivering the presentation 



Handling objections 



Closing 



Follow-up 



FIGURE 8.7 The selling process: steps involved 



Prospecting Prospecting is defined as the seller's search for, and identification of, 
qualified potential buyers of the product or service. Prospecting can be thought of as a two- 
stage process: (1) identifying the individuals and/or the organizations that might be prospects, 
and (2) screening potential prospects against evaluative qualifying criteria. Potential prospects 
that compare favorably to the evaluative criteria can then be classified as qualified prospects. 

Preapproach After the prospect has been qualified, the salesperson continues to 
gather information about the prospect. This process is called the preapproach. The preap- 
proach can be defined as obtaining as much relevant information as possible regarding the 
prospect prior to making a sales presentation. The knowledge gained during the preapproach 
allows the tailoring of the sales presentation to the particular prospect. In many cases, sales- 
people make a preliminary call on the prospect for the purpose of conducting the preap- 
proach. This is perfectly acceptable, and most professional buyers understand that such a 
call may be necessary before a sales presentation can be made. 

Planning the Presentation Regardless of the sales situation, some planning should 
be done before the sales presentation is attempted. The amount of planning that will be nec- 
essary and the nature of the planning depend on many factors, including: (1) the objective 
or objectives of the presentation, (2) how much knowledge the salesperson has regarding 
the buyer, buyer needs, and the buying situation, (3) the type of presentation to be planned 
and delivered, and (4) the involvement of other people assisting the salesperson in the sales 
presentation. Careful planning offers advantages for both the salesperson and the buyer. By 
carefully planning the presentation, salespeople can: (1) focus on important customer needs 
and communicate the relevant benefits to the buyer, (2) address potential problem areas prior 
to the sales presentation, and (3) enjoy self-confidence, which generally increases with the 
amount of planning done by the salesperson. In planning the presentation, the salesperson 
must select the relevant parts of their knowledge base and integrate the selected parts into 
a unified sales message. For any given sales situation, some of the facts concerning the sales- 
person's company, product, and market will be irrelevant. The challenge to the salesperson 
is in the task of distilling relevant facts from the total knowledge base. The key question 



SALES PROMOTION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 217 

here is, "What informatio:l will the Jrospect require before they will choose to buy my 
offering?" 

Delivering the Presentation All sales presentations are not designed to secure an 
immediate sale. Whether the objective is an immediate sale or a future sale, the chances of 
getting a positive response from a prospect are increased when the salesperson: (1) makes 
the presentation in the proper climate, (2) establishes credibility with the prospect, (3) ensures 
clarity of content in the presentation, and (4) controls the presentation within reasorable 
bounds. 

Handling Objections Duri;lg the course of the sales presentation, the salesperson 
can expect the prospect to object to one or more points made by the salesperson. Sales objec- 
tions raised by the prospect can be defined as statements or questions by the prospect which 
can indicate an unwillingness to buy. Salespeople can learn to handle customer's objections 
by becoming aware of the reasons for the objections. The objections of customers incltde 
objections to prices, products, service, the company, time, or competition. The reasons for 
objections include that customers have gotten into the habit of raising objections, customers 
have a desire for more information, and customers have no need for the product or service 
being marketed. Salespeople can overcome objections by following certain guidelines includ- 
ing viewing objections as selling tools, being aware of the benefits of their product;, and 
creating a list of possible objections and the best answers to those objections. 

Closing To a large degree, the evaluation of salespeoples' performance is baseC on 
their ability to close sales. Certainly, other factors are considered in evaluating perform- 
ance, but the bottom line for most salespeople is their ability to consistently produce prof- 
itable sales volume. Individuals who perform as salespeople occupy a unique role: they are 
the only individuals in their companies who bring revenue into the company. 

There may be several opportunities to attempt to close during a presentation, or oppor- 
tunity may knock only once. In fact, sometimes opportunities to close may not present them- 
selves at all and the salesperson must create an opportunity to close. Situations where a 
closing attempt is logical include: 

1. When a presentation has been completed without any objectives from the prospect. 

2. When the presentation has been completed and all objections and questions have 
been answered. 



1. Personal selling involves the direct presentation of a prod- 3. The selling process includes the following steps: 
uct or service idea to a customer or potential customer by a. Prospecting 

a representative of the company or organization. b. Preapproach 

2. There are various types of selling: inside order taker, deliv- c - Planning for presentation 
ery salesperson, route-merchandise salesperson, mission- "■ Delivering the presentation 
ary salesperson, technical salesperson, creative salesperson e - Handling objectives 

of langibles, creative salesperson of intangibles, indirect '■ Closing 

salesperson, salesperson engaged in multiple sales. §■ Follow-up 



218 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



3. When the buyer indicates an interest in the product by giving a closing signal, 
such as a nod of the head. 

Follow-up To ensure customer satisfaction and maximize long-term sales volume, 
salespeople often engage in sales follow-up activities and the provision for post-sale serv- 
ice. I f a sale is not made, a follow-up may eventually lead to a sale. 

Strengths and Weaknesses of 
Personal Selling 

Personal selling has several important advantages and disadvantages compared with the other 
elements of marketing communication mix (see Figure 8.5). Undoubtedly, the most sig- 
nificant strength of personal selling is its flexibility. Salespeople can tailor their presenta- 
tions to fit the needs, motives, and behavior of individual customers. As salespeople see 
the prospect's reaction to a sales approach, they can immediately adjust as needed. 

Personal selling also minimizes waste effort. Advertisers typically expend time and 
money to send a mass message about a product to many people outside the target market. 
In personal selling, the sales force pinpoints the target market, makes a contact, and expends 
effort that has a strong probability of leading to a sale. 

Consequently, an additional strength of personal selling is that measuring effective- 
ness and determining the return on investment are far more straightforward for personal 
selling than for other marketing communication tools, where recall or attitude change is 
often the only measurable effect. 

Another benefit of personal selling is that a salesperson is in an excellent position to 
encourage the customer to act. The one-on-one interaction of personal selling means that 
a salesperson can effectively respond to and overcome objections (customers' concerns or 
reservations about the product) so that the customer is more likely to buy, Salespeople can 
also offer many specific reasons to persuade a customer to buy, in contrast to the general 
reasons that an ad may urge customers to take immediate action. 

A final strength of personal selling is the multiple tasks the sales force can perform. 
For instance, in addition to selling, a salesperson can collect payment service or repair prod- 
ucts, return products, and collect product and marketing information. In fact, salespeople 
are often best at disseminating negative and positive word-of-mouth product information. 

High cost is the primary disadvantage of personal selling. With increased competi- 
tion, higher travel and lodging costs, and higher salaries, the cost per sales contract con- 
tinues to increase. Many companies try to control sales costs by compensating sales 
representatives based on commission only, thereby guaranteeing that salespeople get paid 
only if they generate sales. However, commission-only salespeople may become risk-averse 
and only call on clients who have the highest potential return. These salespeople, then, may 
miss opportunities to develop abroad base of potential customers that could generate higher 
sales revenues in the long run . 

Companies can also reduce sales costs by using complementary techniques, such as 
telemarketing, direct mail, toll-free numbers for interested customers, and online commu- 
nication with qualified prospects. Telemarketing and online communication can further reduce 
costs by serving as an actual selling vehicle. Both technologies can deliver sales messages, 
respond to questions, take payment, and follow up. 

Another disadvantage of personal selling is the problem of finding and retaining high- 
quality people. First, experienced salespeople sometimes realize that the only way their income 
can outpace their cost-of-living increase is to change jobs. Second, because of the push for 
profitability, businesses try to hire experienced salespeople away from competitors rather 



SALES PROMOTION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 219 

than hiring college graduates, who take three to five years to reach the level of productiv- 
ity of more experienced salespeople. These two staffing issues have caused high turnover 
in many sales forces. 

Another weakness of personal selling is message inconsistency. Many salespeople 
view themselves as independent from the organization, so they design their own sales tech- 
niques, use their own message strategies, and engage in questionable ploys to create a sale. 
Consequently, it is difficult to find a unified company or product message within a sales 
force, or between the sales force and the rest of the marketing communication mix. 

A final weakness is that sales force members have different levels of motivation. Sales- 
people may vary in their willingness to make the desired sales calls each day; to make serv- 
ice calls that do not lead directly to sales; or to use new technology, such as a laptop, e-mail, 
or the company's Web site. Finally, overzealous sales representatives may tread a thin line 
between ethical and unethical sales techniques. The difference between a friendly lunch 
and commercial bribery is sometimes blurred. 

The Sales Force of the Future 

What will the sales force of the year 2020 look like? Will it still consist of dependent 
operators who are assigned a territory or a quota? Will the high cost of competing in a 
global marketplace change the traditional salesperson? Although we can speculate about 
dramatic changes in the nature of personal selling, the traditional salesperson figure will 
likely remain intact for several decades. Why? Many products will still need to be sold 
personally by a knowledgeable, trustworthy person who is willing to resolve problems 
at any hour of the day. 

Still, major changes in personal selling will occur, in large part due to technology. 
Though technology has increased selling efficiency, it has also resulted in more complex 
products, so that more sales calls are required per order in many industries. Also, because 
of the trend toward business decentralization, sales representatives now have more small 
or mid-sized accounts to service. Currently, companies such as Hewlett-Packard and Fina 
Oil and Chemical as well as many smaller companies provide laptop computers to all sales- 
people. Computer-based sales tracking and follow-up systems allow salespeople to track 
customers. This technology means that salespeople can assess customer-buying patterns, 
profitability, and changing needs more rapidly. Accessing this jnformation via computer saves 
the salesperson time and allows customization of the sales presentation 

Sales teams will continue to gain in popularity because customers are looking to buy 
more than a product. They are looking for sophisticated design, sales, education, and serv- 
ice support. A sales team includes several individuals who possess unique expertise and 
can coordinate their efforts to help meet the needs of the particular prospect in every way 
possible. The salesperson acts as a team quarterback, ensuring that the account relation- 
ship is managed properly and that the customer has access to the proper support personnel. 

Procter & Gamble is one company that has adopted the team approach. P&G has 22 
sales executives who coordinate the sales effort of various P&G divisions in their assigned 
market areas. Each manager coordinates key account teams composed of sales executives 
from P&G's grocery division. As many as three key account teams may sell in each mar- 
ket. The marketing manager supervises a logistics team composed primarily of computer 
systems and distlibution executives. The team works closely with retailers to develop mutu- 
ally compatible electronic data and distribution systems. P&G hopes the team approach will 
reduce the pressure for trade promotions because the team provides greater service to resellers. 

Salespeople of the future will have to adjust to new forms of competition. With the 
increased capabilities and greater use of direct marketing, for example, salespeople must 



220 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



recognize that some customers will buy a product without contact with a salesperson. Prod- 
uct catalogs that feature everything from computers to classic automobiles are mailed directly 
to customers or ordered on the Internet. These often provide all the informaticn about the 
product the customer needs to know. Questions can be answered through a toll-free num- 
ber, an Internet comment fOIID, or e-mail. Salespeople of the twenty-first century should 
either integrate direct marketing to support the selling process or offer the customer bene- 
fits not availaole through other marketing communications techniques . 

On this very small planet, salespeople will also have to adjust to new sources of com- 
petition. Companies in Asia, South America, and Eastern Europe are introducing ,housands 
of new products to industrialized nations every year. The salesperson of the future must 
know how to respond to foreign competitors and how to enter their markets. A program 
that integrates personal selling with other marketing communication tools will give sales- 
people more opportunity to act efficiently and have selling success. 



NEWSLINE: NEW TOYS FOR SALES SUCCESS? 

Recent technological advances have given salespeople more ways than 
ever to improve sales and productivity. To make technology work, 
however, you have to control it instead of letting it control you. Start 
by learning to use everyday tools (computer, fax, and e-mail) more 
efficiently and effectively. Once you know how to get the most out of 
technology, you can get more out of each workday. 

• Get a voice-mail advantage. You can avoid time-consuming two- 
way phone conversations by outlining detail in voice mail. Also, 
if you need the person for whom you're leaving the message to 
take some actions, say so in the message, then say there's no 
need to call you back unless they have questions or problems. 

• Improve your email habits. To avoid frequent interruptions to 
your workday, set aside specific, scheduled times dUring the day 
to answer your e-mail. 

• Fax casually. When you're flooded with faxes, forget about tak- 
ing the time to send replies on new sheets of paper and fill out 
cover sheets. Instead, simply hand-write your replies at the bot- 
tom of the fax you received and turn it around. 

• Get better acquainted with your PC. Take an hO'Jr or so before or 
after work for a week to learn all of your computer's functions 
and how they can boost your productivity. 

• Make a sound investment. You rely on technology every day to 
do your job, so it pays to spend a little more for equipment that 
won't let you down. Carefully assess your technology needs, 
then shop around for equipment that meets those needs without 
a lot of bells and whistles. 

• Take a break. Overall increases in the speed of business can 
leave a salesperson feeling done in and turned out. 

Sources: Robin Sharma. "A Technology Edge," Selling Power, January/Febru- 
ary, 1998, pp. 37-38; Ginger Conlon, "How to Move Customers Online," Sales 
& Marketing Management, March 2000, pp. 27-28; Neil Rackman, "The Other 
Revolution in Sales," Sales & Marketing Management, March 2000, pp. 34-35. 




THE WALL STREET JOIRJAL 



IN PRACTICE 

Marketing communication must 
communicate an organization's 
ideas to its target audiences, com- 
pete consistently and effectively in 
the marketplace, and convince con- 
sumers to buy its products. To 
achieve these objectives, marketers 
design an integrated marketing 
communication plan using advertis- 
ing, sales promotion, public rela- 
tions, and personal selling. 

Marketing communication h 
both internal and external in scope 
with an array of target audiences, 
some small, some large. Marketing 
communication is also both direct 
and indirect. Advertising and public 
relations are indirect, mass commu- 
nication systems, while sales pro- 
motion and personal selling are 
direct, interpersonal and organiza- 
tional systems. 

The Marketplace section of the 
Interactive lournal is an invaluable 
source for articles related to mar- 
keting communication. With a sec- 
tion dedicated for Advertising 
news, the Journal keeps readers 
informed of the latest trends in the 
field. 

Marketplace Columns are the 
main features in the Marketplace 
section. They are regular weekly 
columns, offering insight into a 
variety of topical issues such as 
E-business and work and family. 

The Marketplace Extra section 
is the online companion to the 
print edition's supplement to the 
Weekend Journal. Here you'll fine' 
stories about broader market 
trends. Astute marketers can lever- 
age this information to learn more 
about consumer behavior. In turn, 
they can develop marketing com- 



munication strategies with more 
relevant and convincing messages. 

CAREERS 

Many marketers get their start in 
advertising, sales, or public rela- 
tions. The Interactive Journal offers 
job seekers advice about finding 
jobs and building careers. On the 
Front Section, click on the Careers 
link under Free WSJ.com Sites. 
You'll find negotiation strategies, a 
career Q & A, and interviewing 
tips. You can also find information 
about writing effective cover letters 
and resumes. 

DELIVERABLE 

Read one of the featured articles in 
today's Marketplace section of the 
Interactive Journal. Search the 
Interactive Journal and other rele- 
vant sites for additional informa- 
tion. Identify the marketing 
communication strategies the com- 
pany uses and argue their effective- 
ness. Support your conclusions with 
facts and chapter concepts. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 

1. Why are organizations shifting 
from specialized to integrated 
marketing commurication 
strategies? 

2. How can organizations design 
marketing communication pro- 
grams that keep pace with the 
rapid changes in technology? 

3. What careers are available in 
advertising? Sales? Public rela- 
tions? What skills are employ- 
ers seeking for these positiors? 



221 



222 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 

SUMMARY 



Marketing communication remains one of the most visible and controversial aspects of marketing. 
Everyday we see hundreds of ads, redeem coupons, are approached by a variety of salespeople, and 
are told by countless companies how good they are. This chapter introduces the persuasive arm of 
marketing communication. In it we suggest that since everything about a company is going to com- 
municate something, it would be beneficial to have as much control over this process as possible. 
Other reasons for planning the communication effort are also discussed, as are the primary objec- 
tives: (1) to communicate, (2) to convince, and (3) to compete. The systems model of communica- 
tion is discussed to clarify the general communications process. Components of this process are defined 
and described. Types of communications systems are described. IMC is defined from a broad per- 
spective, and then categorized into four components: (1) advertising, (2) personal selling, (3) public 
relations, and (4) sales promotion. The eight-step process involved in designing an IMC strategy is 
discussed. 

Advertising is discussed in the context of marketing communication that is targeted at mass 
markets. It contains a sequential process, but is higWighted through its creative strategy and media 
strategy. 

Sales promotion and public relations are two components that are both misunderstood and mis- 
used. The second part of this chapter develops some basic concepts related to both strategies. Rea- 
sons for sales promotion and types of sales promotion are discussed. Public relations is viewed in 
terms of its two publics, internal and external. Several techniques used to reach these publics are 
proposed. 

Professional selling has been defined as personal contact aimed at successfully persuading 
prospects to buy products or services from which they can derive suitable benefits. Selling is a major 
force in our economy, both in terms of employment and its impact on the success of various organ- 
izations. The product, customer, competition, and environment must all be considered in determin- 
ing the relative emphasis to place on personal selling in the promotional mix. The activities of a 
salesperson can be broken into a series of steps called the sales process. Not all of the steps are required 
for every sale, but the complete process includes prospecting, preapproach, planning the presenta- 
tion, the approach, delivering the presentation, handling objectives, closing, and follow-up. 



MARKETER'S VOCABULARY 



Advertising (consumer's perspective) One of several incoming messages directed at the con- 
sumer, the salience of which is influenced by the emotional, physical, and need state of the indi- 
vidual, and the benefit of which can be information, motivation, and entertainment. 

Advertising (societal perspective) An institution of society that has the capability of informing 
the citizen, stimulating economic growth, and providing knowledge useful in decision making, as 
well as the tendency both to misallocate scarce economic resources and lead consumers to engage 
in behavior that may not be in their best interest. 

Advertising (business perspective) Advertising's function is primarily to inform potential buy- 
ers of the problem-solving utility of a firm's market offering, with the objective of developing con- 
sumer preferences for a particular brand. 

Advertising campaign The culmination of all the strategic, creative, and operational efforts of 
the people working towards a particular set of advertising objectives. 

Creative strategy Concerns what an advertiser is going to say to an audience, based on the 
advertising objectives. Strategy should outline what impressions the campaign should convey to 
the target audience. 



DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 223 



Creative tactics Specific means of implementing strategy. 



Sales promotion Temporary special offers intended to provide a direct stimulus to produce a 
desired response by customers. 

Price deals Short-term reductions in the price of a product to stimulate demand that has fallen off. 

Coupon offers, certificates for a specified amount off a product. 

Combination offers Link two products together for a price lower than the products purchased 
separately. 

Contest A promotion that involves the award of a prize on the basis of chance or merit. 

Rebates A refund of a fixed amount of money for a certain amount of time. 

Premium offers A tangible reward received for performing a particular act, usually purchasing a 
product. 

Consumer sampling Getting the physical product into the hands of the consumer. 

Push money A monetary bonus paid by a manufacturer to a retail salesperson for every unit of a 
product sold. 

Dealer loader A premium that is given to a retailer by a manufacturer for buying a certain 
amount of a product. 

Trade deals Strategies intended to encourage middlemen to give a manufacturer's product spe- 
cial promotional efforts that it would normally not receive. 

Public relations Public relations practice is the art and social science of analyzing trends, pre- 
dicting their consequences, counseling organization leaders, and implementing planned programs 
of action that serve both the organization's and the public interest. 

Internal publics People connected with an organization with whom the organization normally 
communicates in the ordinary routine of work. 

External publics People not necessarily closely connected with an organization. 

Campaign Planned series of promotional efforts designed to reach a predetermined goal through 
a single theme or idea. 

Communication A process in which two or more persons attempt to consciously or uncon- 
sciously influence each other through the use of symbols or words in order to satisfy their respec- 
tive needs. 

Federal Trade Commission (FTC) Government agency established to protect businesses against 
unfair competition. 

Marketing communication Includes all the identifiable efforts on the part of the seller that are 
intended to help persuade buyers to accept the seller's message and store it in retrievable form. 

IMC mix Various combinations of elements in a promotional plan: advertising, sales promotion, 
personal selling, public relations. 



DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 



1. List the basic objectives of marketing communication. Why is it often difficult for promoters to 
reach their objectives? Provide some valid reasons why marketers should pursue these objectives. 



224 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNICATING TO MASS MARKETS 



2. Assume that top management for General Equipment, Inc. hired you to determine if a promo- 
tional opportunity exists for a fabricated part that has been developed for heavy-duty equipment. 
What criteria would you use as a basis of investigation? 

3. Define the phrase "sales promotion." Cite some examples of how sales promotion can supple- 
ment or complement the other components of the IMC mix. 

4. What steps might a public relations person take to prevent the firm from acquiring a negative 
public image? 

5. Assume that you are the public relations director for a bank. Suppose that two people were robbed 
while withdrawing money from an automatic 24-hour teller machine. Develop a program in 
response to this incident. 

6. How is the consumer's definition of advertising different from that of a businessperson's? 

7. Give some examples of situations in which primary demand product advertising might be fruit- 
ful. When would selective demand product advertising be useful? 

8. Assume that you have been charged with organizing an in-house advertising department for a 
growing consumer products company. The first task is to hire an advertising manager who will 
have ultimate responsibility. What responsibilities should be mentioned in the job description for 
this position? 

9. Explain the difference between creative strategy and creative tactics. 

10. List and describe the various types of appeals. Develop an appeal, as well as tactics to opera- 
tionalize this appeal, for Old Spice Shave Cream. 



PROJECT 



Can you cite some examples of how either advertising or another form of marketing communication 
led you to purchase a product that did not satisfy a need? Could any form of MC (marketing com- 
munications) or gimmick lead you to repurchase it? Has MC enabled you to find a product which 
satisfies a personal need? How might future MC keep you loyal to a product? Write a two- to three- 
page response. 



CASE APPLICATION 



THE MICRORECORDER 

One of the fastest growing industries in the Uniled States in ihe past ten years has been the direct 
marketing of a wide variety of consumer goods and services. Today it is not unusual for most of us 
to shop by mail (or use some other form of direct marketing) for almost anything imaginable. Among 
the most well-known and successful direct marketers is Neiman Marcus, a retail department store 
thai also discovered the additional profits of selling such unusual gifts as elephants, airplanes, and 
$1,000 boxes of chocolate candy- all by mail. 

But Neiman Marcus is certainly not alone. There are literally thousands of companies selling 
via direct marketing. One of these companies is American import Corporation. American Import was 
started in 1969 by Tom and Sally 3truven. They started their business by importing a line of Japan- 
ese-made sports watches and selling them for $29.95 with advertisements in The Wall Street Jour- 
nal. The Rotarian, Elks Magazine, and the Legionnoire. At thai time, comparable watches were retailing 
for $49.95 to $79.95. The Struveni: were successful, and in the next few years they continued to expand 
their product lines, compiled their own customer list, and eventually issued a shopping catalog. Nthough 
the catalog was successful, they discovered the most successful way to introduce a new item was to 
advertise it separately. 



REFERENCES 225 

In early 1980, Tom and Sally StTUven made arrangements to purchase 50,000 microrecorders 
from a Korean manufacturer. These recorders measured I x 2'A x 5Vi inches and were supplied with 
a built-in microphone, a vinyl carrying case, a wrist strap, and a 3D-minute microcassette. The 
microrecorder is operated by 4 AA batteries or an optional AC adapter. 

This type of recorder became very popular in the past few years, particularly among busi- 
nesspeople. A traveling executive or salesperson could dictate letters on the microrecorder and then 
have a secretary transcribe them onto letterhead. The microrecorder is also ideal as an audio notepad, 
substituting for paper-and pencil-notetaking. 

The first microrecorder was brought to the mass market in 1975 and retailed for $400. Since 
then, several companies entered the market, and today there are approximately twelve major brands 
available through traditional retail locations. The prices of microrecorders vary by the sophistication 
of the individual piece of equipment; however, the retail price range is $90 to $250. 

American Import Corporation decided to offer its microrecorder for $39.95. Although Amer- 
ican Import's product was a technically simply product, it did a very capable and reliable job of per- 
forming the basic task of recording and playing back the human voice. 

With several years of direct marketing experience behind them, the Struvens decided to intro- 
duce the microrecorder via direct marketing. They were planning an advertising campaign in Barron's, 
the Wall Street Journal, the New York Times, the Chicago Tribune, the Los Angeles Times, and a spot 
television campaign in selected markets. 

The StfUvens were very excited about the sales prospects of their new microrecorder, and while 
the media portion of their advertising campaign was rather obvious, they could not decide on the best 
creative approach for the product. 

Several possible themes came to mind. For example, should the product be sold on the basis 
of its comparatively low price? Its simplicity of operation? Its flexibility of use? Its size/convenience? 
Perhaps they should use a competitive-comparison strategy? How about their no-risk, 3D-day trial? 

The products had anived from Korea. The media schedule had been set. Shipping procedures 
were established. Contractual arrangements with service organizations had been made. The only obsta- 
cle between American Impoll Corporation and a new source of profits seemed to be the selection of 
the most promising creative strategy for this new minirecorder. 

Questions: 

1. What creative strategy would you recommend to the StfUvens') 

2. Suggest three alternative creative executions of the recommended strategy for a print 
advertisement. 



REFERENCES 



Don E. Schultz, Stanley 1. Tannenbaum and Robert F. Lauterborn , lnte- 5. Ann M. Mack, "Banner Daze," Adweek, May 22, 2000, p. 86. 

grated Marketing Communications, 1993, Chicago: NTC Business 6. "Shaping the Future of Sales Promotion," Council of Sales Promo- 

Books. tion Agencies, 1990, pp. 3. 

Tom Duncan, "A Macro Model of Ingetraged Marketing Communi- 7. "Careers in Public Relations," Public Relations Society of America, 

cations:' American Academ)' of Advertising Annual Conference, 1995, Summer 1989, pp. 18-30. 

Norfolk, VA. 8. Regis McKenna, "Relationship Marketing." 1991 , Reading, MA, 

Melanie Wells. "Many Clients Prize Agency Efficiency over Cre- Addison- Wesley Publishing Co. 

ativity," Advertising Age, May 16, 1994, p.28. 9. Don E. Schultz, "Make Communications Worth the Profits," The Mar- 

Terrance A. Shimp, Advertising Promotion, Fifth ed., 2000, The keting News, January 15, 2001, p. 13. 

Dryden Press, p. 561. 



CHAPTER9 



PRICING THE PRODUCT 



LEARNING OBJECTIVES 



After you have read this chapter, you should develop an understand- 
ing of the following key points related to pricing: 

The meaning of pricing from the perspective of the buyer, seller, 

and society. 

The sellers' objectives in making pricing decisions. 

The alternative pricing approaches available to the manager. 



THE MCDONALD'S EFFECT 



McDonald's is one humongous company. With 2:, 000 restaurants in 101 coun- 
tries, it is everywhere-which is why the glotal economy is sometimes called McWorld. 
But back home in America, the execs that run this vast e.mpire aren't feeling very lordly. 
More than ever they find they have to kowtow to the price demands of ordinary folks 
like Alonso Reyes, a 19-year-old Chicagoan who works at a local car dealership. Never 
mind that Chicago is Micky D's world headquarters- he splits his fast-food patronage 
between McDonald's and its arCh-rival, Burger King, and counts every pennyworth of 
beef when deciding where to eat. So Reyes perked up when he heard that McDonald's 
had announced "an unprecedented value offering" -a 55-cent Big Mac that the company 
boasted was bad news for their competition. "Cool," said Reyes, "Coupons, specials, 
sales. I'll take whatever I can get." 

For McDonald's top management, this pricing strategy made perfect sense. After 
all, declining same-store sales in the U.S. were the chain's most glaring weakness. What 
better way to put some sizzle in the top line than a bold pocketbook appeal? 

Well, McDonald's executives should have realized that there is, in fact, a better 
way. But apparently they took no notice of the fallout when Phillip Morris announced 
deep cuts on "Marlboro Friday," or of "Grape Nuts Monday," when the Post unit of Kraft 
Foods kicked off a cereal price war. Predictably, "Hamburger Wednesday" sent investors 
on a Big Mac attack, slicing 9% off McDonald's share price in three days and dragging 
rival fast-food issues down with it. "It looks almost desperate," says Piper Jaffray, Inc. 
analyst Allan Hickok of the 55-cent come-on. Adds Damon Brundage of NatWest Secu- 
rities Corp.; "They have transformed one of the great brands in American business into a 
commodity." 

In theory, McDonald's plan will payoff, because customers only get the discount 
if they buy a drink and french-fries, too. Yet that gimmick- within-a-gimmick threatens to 



226 



PRICE DEFINED:THREE DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVES 



227 



undermine pricier "Extra Value Meals," one of the chain's most successful marketing ini- 
tiatives. Consumers expecting cut-rate combos won't go back to paying full price, espe- 
cially if other fast-feeders discount their package deals. 

Sources: Greg BUllls, "McDonald's: Now, It's Just Another Burger Joint," Business Week, March 17, 1997, pp. 3-8; Bill 
McDowell, "McDonald's Falls Back to Price-Cutting Tactics," Advertising Age, February 3, 1997, pp. 5-7; Michael Hirsch, 
"The Price is Right," Time, February 10, 1997, p. 83; Louise Kramer, "More-Nimble McDonald's is Getting Back on Track," 
Advertising Age, January 18, 1999, p. 6; David Leonhardt, "Getting Off Their McButts," Business Week, February 22, 1999, pp. 
84-85; Bruce Horovitz, "Fast-Food Facilities Face Sales Slowdown," USA Today, Wednesday, February 21 , 2001, p. 3B. 



INTRODUCTION 



From a customer's point of view, value is the sole justification for price, Many times cus- 
tomers lack an understanding of the cost of mateliais and other costs that go into the mak- 
ing of a product. But those customers can understand what that product does for them in 
the way of providing value. It is on this basis that customers make decisions about the pur- 
chase of a product. 

Effective pricing meets the needs of consumers and facilitates the exchange process. 
It requires that marketers understand that not all buyers want to pay the same price for prod- 
ucts, just as they do not all want the same product, the .same distribution outlets, or the same 
promotional messages. Therefore, in order to effectively price products, markets must dis- 
tinguish among various market segments. The key to effective pricing is the same as the 
key to effective product, distribution, and promotion strategies. Marketers must understand 
buyers and price their products according to buyer needs if exchanges are to occur, How- 
ever, one cannot overlook the fact that the price must be sufficient to support the plans of 
the organization, including satisfying stockholders. Price charged remains the primary source 
of revenue for most businesses, 



PRICE DEFINED: THREE DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVES 

Although making the pricing decision is usually a marketing decision, making it correctly 
requires an understanding of both the customer and society's view of price as well. In some 
respects, price setting is the most important decision made by a business. A price set too 
low may result in a deficiency in revenues and the demise of the business. A price set too 
high may result in poor response from customers and, unsurprisingly, the demise of the busi- 
ness. The consequences of a poor pricing decision, therefore, can be dire. We begin our 
discussion of pricing by considering the perspective of the customer. 



The Customer's View of Price 

As discussed in an earlier chapter, a customer can be either the ultimate user of the finished 
product or a business that purchases components of the finished product. It is the customer 
that seeks to satisfy a need or set of needs through the purchase of a particular product or 
set of products. Consequently, the customer uses several criteria to determine how much they 
are willing to expend in order to satisfy these needs. Ideally, the customer would like to pay 
as little as possible to satisfy these needs. This perspective is summarized in Figure 9.1. 

Therefore, for the business to increase value (i.e., create the competitive advantage), 
it can either increase the perceived benefits or reduce the perceived costs, Both of these 
elements should be considered elements of price, 



228 CHAPTER 9 PRICING THE PRODUCT 

PRICE 

\ 
I I I 

VALUE =PERCEIVED BENEFITS - PERCEIVED COSTS 
FIGURE 9.1 The customer's view of price 



To a certain extent, perceived benefits are the mirror image of perceived costs. For 
example, paying a premium price-e.g., $650 for a piece of Lalique crystal-is compen- 
sated for by having this exquisite work of art displayed in one's home. Other possible per- 
ceived benefits directly related to the price- value equation are status, convenience, the deal , 
brand, quality, choice, and so forth. Many of these benefits tend to overlap. For instance, 
a Mercedes Benz E 750 is a very high-status brand name and possesses superb quality. This 
makes it worth the $100,000 price tag. Further, if Mark Smith can negotiate a deal reduc- 
ing the price by $ 15,000, that would be his incentive to purchase. Likewise, someone liv- 
ing in an isolated mountain community is willing to pay substantially more for groceries 
at a local store rather than drive 78 miles to the nearest Safeway. That person is also will- 
ing to sacrifice choice for greater convenience. Increasing these perceived benefits is rep- 
resented by a recently coined term-value-added. Thus, providing value-added elements 
to the product has become a popular strategic alternative. Computer manufacturers now com- 
pete on value-added components such as free delivery setup, training, a 24-hour help line, 
trade-in, and upgrades. 

Perceived costs include the actual dollar amount printed on the product, plus a host 
of additional factors. As noted, these perceived costs are the mirror-opposite of the bene- 
fits. When finding a gas station that is selling its highest grade for 60 less per gallon, the 
customer must consider the 16-mile drive to get there, the long line, the fact that the mid- 
dle grade is not available, and heavy traffic. Therefore, inconvenience, limited choice, and 
poor service are possible perceived costs. Other common perceived costs include risk of 
making a mistake, related costs, lost opportunity, and unexpected consequences, to name 
but a few. A new cruise traveler discovers she really doesn't enjoy that venue for several 
reasons-e.g., she is given a bill for incidentals when she leaves the ship, she has used up 
her vacation time and money, and she receives unwanted materials from this company for 
years to come. 

In the end, viewing price from the customer's perspectivs pays off in many ways. Most 
notably, it helps define value- the most important basis for creating a competitive advantage. 

Price from a Societal Perspective 

Price, at least in dollars and cents, has been the historical view of value. Derived from a 
bartering system-i.e., exchanging goods of equal value-the monetary system of each soci- 
ety provides a more convenient way to purchase goods and accumulate wealth. Price has 
also become a variable society employs to control its economic health. Price can be inclu- 
sive or exclusive. In many countries, such as Russia, China, and South Africa, high prices 
for products such as food, health care, housing, and automobiles, means that most of the 
population is excluded from purchase. In contrast, countries such as Denmark, Germany, 
and Great Britain charge little for health care and consequently make it available to all . 

There are two different ways to look at the role price plays in a society: rational man 
and irrational man. The former is the primary assumption underlying economic theory, and 



PRICE DEFINED:THREE DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVES 



229 



suggests that the results of price manipulatio' 1 are predictable. The latter role for price 
acknowledges that man's response to price is sometimes unpredictable and pretesting price 
manipulation is a necessary task. Let's discuss each briefly. 

Rational Man Pricing: An Economic Perspective 

Basically, economics assumer. that the consumer is a rational decision maker and has per- 
fect information. Therefore, if a price for a particular product goes up and the customer is 
aware of all relevant information, demand will be reduced for that product. Should price 
decline, demand would increase. That is, the quantity demanded typically rises causing a 
downward sloping demand curve. 

A demand curve shows the quantity demanded at various price levels (see Figure 9.2). 
As a seller changes the price requested to a lower level, the product or service may become 
an attractive use of financial resources to a larger number of buyers, thus expanding the 
total market for the item. This total market demand by all buyers for a product type (not 
just for the company's own brand name) is called primary demand. Additionally, a lower 
price may cause buyers to shift purchases from competitors, assuming that the competitors 
do not meet the lower price. If prima ~y demand does not expand and competitors meet the 
lower price the result will be lower total revenue for all sellers. 

Since, in the U.S., we operate as a free market economy, there are few instances when 
someone outside the organization controls a product's price. Even commodity-like prod- 
ucts such as air travel, gasoline, and telecommunications, now determine their own prices. 
Because large companies have economists on staff and buy into the assumptions of eco- 
nomic theory as it relates to price, the classic price-demand relationship dictates the eco- 
nomic health of most societies. Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the U. S. Federal Reserve, 
determines interest rates charged by banks as well as the money supply, thereby directly 
affecting price (especially of stocks and bonds). He is considered by many to be the most 
influential person in the world. 




Demand curve (1) 



O 100 140 

Quantity demanded in a given period of time (# of units) 



A $3 reduction in price unit would cause a 40-unit increase in the 
quantity demanded assuming no other variable changes. 



FIGURE 9.2 Price and der;land 



230 CHAPTER 9 PRICING THE PRODUCT 



Irrational Man Pricing: Freedom Rules 

There are simply too many examples to the contrary to believe that the economic assulop- 
tions posited under the rational man model are valid. Prices go up and people buy more. 
Prices go down and people become suspicious and buy less. Sometimes we simply behave 
in an irrational manner. Clearly, as noted in our earlier discussion on consumers, there are 
other factors operating in the marketplace. The ability of paying a price few others can afford 
may be irrational, but it provides important personal status. There are even people who refuse 
to buy anything on sale. Or, others who buy everything on sale. Often businesses are will- 
ing to hire a $10,000 consultant, who does no more than a $5,000 consultant, simply to 
show the world they're successful. 

In many societies, an additional irrational phenomenon may exist-support of those 
that cannot pay. In the U. S., there are literally thousands of not-for-profit organizations that 
provide goods and services to individuals for very little cost or free. There are also gov- 
ernment agencies that do even more. Imagine what giving away surplus food to the needy 
does to the believers of the economic model. 

Pricing planners must be aware of both the rational as well as the irrational model, 
since, at some level, both are likely operating in a society. Choosing one over the other is 
neither wise nor necessary. 

The Marketer's View of Price 

Price is important to marketers, because it represents marketers' assessment of the value 
customers see in the product or service and are willing to pay for a product or service. A 
number of factors have changed the way marketers undertake the pricing of their products 
and services, i 

1. Foreign competition has put considerable pressure on U.S. firms' pricing strate- 
gies. Many foreign-made products are high in quality and compete in U.S. mar- 
kets on the basis of lower price for good value. 

2. Competitors often try to gain market share by reducing their prices. The pnce reduc- 
tion is intended to increase demand from customers who are judged to be sensi- 
tive to changes in price. 

3. New products are far more prevalent today than in the past. Pricing a new prod- 
uct can represent a challenge, as there is often no historical basis for pricing new 
products. I f a new product is priced incorrectly, the marketplace will react unfa- 
vorably and the "wrong" price can do long-term damage to a product's chances 
for marketplace success. 

4. Technology has led to existing products having shorter marketplace lives. New 
products are introduced to the market more frequently, reducing the "shelf life" 
of existing products. As a result, marketers face pressures to price products to 
recover costs more quickly. Prices must be set for early successes including fast 
sales growth, quick market penetration, and fast recovery of research and devel- 
opment costs. 



PRICING OBJECTIVES 



Firms rely on price to cover the cost of production, to pay expenses, and to provide the 
profit incentive necessary to continue to operate the business. We might think of these fac- 



DEVELOPING A PRICING STRATEGY 231 



1. Price should be viewed from three perspectives: c. Sales 

a. The customer d. Market share 

b. The marketer e. Image 

c. Society 

2. Pricing objectives: 

a. Survival 

b. Profit 



tors as helping organizations to: (1) survive, (2) earn a profit, (3) generate sales, (4) secure 
an adequate share of the market, and (5) gain an appropriate image. 

1. Survival: It is apparent that most managers wish to pursue strategies that enable 
their organizations to continue in operation for the long term. So survival is one 
major objective pursued by most executives. For a commercial firm, the price paid 
by the buyer generates the firni's revenue. If revenue falls below cost for a long 
period of time, the firm cannot survive. 

2. Profit: Survival is closely linked to profitability. Making a $500,000 profit dur- 
ing the next year might be a pricing objective for a firm . Any thing less will ensure 
failure. All business enterprises must earn a long-term profit. For many businesses, 
long-term profitability also allows the business to satisfy their most important 
constituents-stockholders. Lower-than-expected or no profits will drive down stock 
prices and may prove disastrous for the company. 

3. Sales: Just as survival requires a long-term profit for a business enterprise, profit 
requires sales. As you will recall from earlier in the text, the task of marketing 
management relates to managing demand. Demand must be managed in order to 
regulate exchanges or sales. Thus marketing management's aim is to alter sales 
patterns in some desirable way. 

4. Market Share: If the sales of Safeway Supermarkets in the Dallas-Fort Worth met- 
ropolitan area account for 30% of all food sales in that area, we say that Safeway 
has a 30% market share. Management of all firms, large and small, are concerned 
with maintaining an adequate share of the market so that their sales volume will 
enable the firm to survive and prosper. Again, pricing strategy is one of the tools 
that is significant in creating and sustaining market share. Prices must be set to 
attract the appropriate market segment in significant numbers. 

5. Image: Price policies play an important role in affecting a firm's position of respect 
and esteem in its community. Price is a highly visible communicator. It must con- 
vey the message to the community that the firm offers good value, that it is fair 
in its dealings with the public, that it is a reliable place to patronize, and that it 
stands behind its products and services. 

DEVELOPING A PRICING STRATEGY 

While pricing a product or service may seem to be a simple process, it is not. As an illus- 
tration of the typical pricing process, consider the following quote: "Pricing is guesswork. 
It is usually assumed that marketers use scientific methods to determine the price of their 



232 



CHAPTER 9 PRICING THE PRODUCT 



products. Nothing could be further from the truth, in almost every case, the process of deci- 
sion is one of guesswork. "2 

Good pricing strategy is usually based on sound assumptions made by marketers. It 
is also based on an understanding of the two other perspectives discussed earlier. Clearly, 
sale pricing may prove unsuccessful unless the marketer adopts the consumer's perspec- 
tive toward price. Similarly, a company should not charge high prices if it hurts society's 
health. Hertz illustrates how this can be done in the Integrated Marketing Box that follows. 

A pricing decision that must be made by all organizations concerns their competi- 
tive position within their industry. This concern manifests itself in either a competitive pric- 
ing strategy or a nonprice competitive strategy. Let's look at the latter first. 

Nonprice Competition 

Nonprice competition means that organizations use strategies other than price to attract cus- 
tomers . Advertising, credit, delivery, displays, private brands, and convenience are all exam- 
ple of tools used in nonprice competition. Businesspeople prefer to use nonprice competition 



INTEGRATED MARKETING 



HOW TO SELECT THE BEST PRICE 



The Hertz Corporation knows when its rental cars will be gone 
and it knows when the lots will be full. How? By tracking 
demand throughout past six years. "We know, based on past 
performance and seasonal changes, what times of year there 
is a weak demand, and when there is too much demand for our 
supply of cars," says Wayne Meserue, director of pricing and 
yield management at Hertz. To help strike a balance, the com- 
pany uses a pricing strategy called "yield management" that 
keeps supply and demand in check. The strategy looks at two 
aspects of Hertz's pricing: the rate that is charged and the length 
of the rental. 

"Price is a legitimate rationing device," says Meserue. 
"What we're really talking about is efficient distribution, pric- 
ing, and response in the marketplace." For example, there are 
times when cars are in great demand. "It's always a gamble, 
but it's definitely a calculated gamble. With yield manage- 
ment, we monitor demand day by day, and adjust (prices as 
necessary)," Meserue says. 

Hertz also uses length of rental as a yield management 
device. For instance, they established a three-night minimum 
for car rentals during President's Day weekend in Febmary. 
"We didn't want to be turning away business for someone who 
wanted the car for five nights just because we had given our 
cars to people who came in first for one night," says Meserue, 
who adds that it's often better for Hertz to mandate a mini- 
mum number of days for a rental, because it ensures that cars 
will be rented for more days. 

A smart pricing strategy is essential for increasing profit 
margins and reducing supply. Yet at last count, only 15% of 



large corporations were conducting any sort of pricing 
research, reports Robert Dolan, professor at Harvard Business 
School. " People don ' t realize that if you can raise your prices 
by just one percent, that's a big increase in your profit mar- 
gin," he says. For example, if a supermarket is operating with 
a two-percent net margin, raising the prices by one percent 
will increase profitability by 33%. "The key is not taking one 
percent across the board, but raising it 10% for 10% of your 
customers," says Dolan, "Find those segments of the market 
that are willing to take the increase." That doesn't mean that 
companies can automatically pass their cost increases on the 
customer, notes Dolan. If the costs are affecting an entire 
industry, then those costs can be passed through easily to the 
consumer, because competitors will likely follow the lead. 

A fundamental point in smart pricing, according to Dolan: 
base prices on the value to the customer. As much as people 
talk about customer focus, they often price according to their 
own costs, Companies can profit from customizing prices to 
different customers. The value of a product can vary widely 
depending on factors such as age and location. 

Source: Ginger Conlon, "Making Sure the Price is Right;' Sales 
and Marketing Management, May 1996, pp. 92—93; Thomas T. 
Nagle and Reed K. Holden, The Strategy and Tactics ofPricing, 
2nd ed., Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall, Inc. 1995; 
William C. Symonds, '"Build a Better Mousetrap' is No Claptrap;' 
Business Week, February 1, 1999, p. 47; Marcia Savage, "Intel to 
Slash Pentium II Prices," Company Reseller News, February 8, 
1999, pp. 1. 10. 



DEVELOPING A PRICING STRATEGY 233 



Now. choose trom more than 200 Davs Business Hffl hOlels worldwide. 






% 



6t*tU 



DndaiU 



MewtW 



HmMthUACA 
S»P*)oli.fcll« 

StfjM*Sjirv*#*C& 
SvafctCA 

fn«.« 
ttau«rt*lCl 

WmfcttnmCt 

C*VMMKf*MtC9 

frMfCO 

«W*(B!rCmK»« **,(!£ 

Qwmw& Prenbt/j jkijan ft 

UMMiJmnH 

(MM* A 

1*«(*hKt.W|<^N,fL 



UGwmH 

5»i~iM«»iii,a 



Mwnfit'A 




firnlO 
Untie 

MM M 
UK* ■ 

OMdMnnH 



u 



nOlB 



; 1 



if* 
HtftfryPA 



bwl.sr, 
Cabrti.SC 

l*ll««*SC 
tareAfiSC 

i - ■:: 



ta.S,'Mt»kT< 
Hn*T( 

Siitnd'iDIMa.n 
SMAWM«HmR 

s»jmti 

ftwtW 
SitUMCfeUT 

■ HOC* 



Every Days Business Place* room included laptop datapon 

coffee maker * in- room snack pecfc • large desk with hiflfi- intensity lighting 

mi crowaveftnini -fridge * electric iron with full site boeid • hair dryer 

(ex machine down the hell 



(tana* umtifeKhn. « 






Jajpwf* 
XaaafcH 






/""\ 



DAYS INN 



BUS NESS PLACE 



There you go; 






ft*** 

WmmM 
lata W 



£saft*a.H.(MU 
A»»Oi toHatHC it «Mt 

(Ma* MOW Watt 






J>*rm.W 
MtJmftt 



VnmtOYUJ 



r&teMMS 

lll-IW.-'li 



EauSpBCtW 
lw«BlPlft.M0 
InwnVC 



HaOaat*UCp>l.Ll 

■enetut 



behLU 
rnurwtftii 



4il 

uuekun 

SimfUBW 

W*aa.W 

r**i6 

Man !•: 



KmnfiKUIKIIDNeHV 
iwiMrianirirBDCWM 



«aa*«r; 



HaMtwrancew 
UMfikLtmun 






AD 9.1 An example of nonprice competition. 



rather than price competition, because it is more difficult to match nonprice characteris- 
tics. Competing on the basis of price may also have a deleterious impact on company prof- 
itability. Unfortunately, when most businesses think about price competition, they view it 
as matching the lower price of a competitor, rather than pricing smarter. In fact, it may be 



234 CHAPTER 9 PRICING THE PRODUCT 



wiser not to engage in price competition for other reasons. Price may simply not offer th* 3 
business a competitive advantage (employing the value equation). 

Competitive Pricing 

Once a business decides to use price as a primary competitive strategy, there are many wej] - 
established tools and techniques that can be employed. The pricing process normally begins 
with a decision about the company's pricing approach to the market. 

Approaches to the Market 

Price is a very important decision criteria that customers use to compare alternatives. It also 
contributes to the company's position. In general, a business can price itself to match its 
competition, price higher, or price lower. Each has its pros and cons. 

Pricing to Meet Competition Many organizations attempt to establish prices that, 
on average, are the same as those set by their more important competitors. Automobiles of 
the same size and having equivalent equipment tend to have similar prices. This strategy 
means that the organization uses price as an indicator or baseline. Quality in production, 
better service, creativity in advertising, or some other element of the marketing mix are used 
to attract customers who are interested in products in a particular price category, 

The keys to implementing a strategy of meeting competitive prices are an accurate 
definition of competition and a knowledge of competitor's prices. A maker of hand-crafted 
leather shoes is not in competition with mass producers. If he/she attempts to compete with 
mass producers on price, higher production costs will make the business unprofitable. A 
more realistic definition of competition for this purpose would be other makers of hand- 
crafted leather shoes. Such a definition along with a knowledge of their prices would allow 
a manager to put the strategy into effect. Banks shop competitive banks every day to check 
their prices . 

Pricing Above Competitors Pricing above competitors can be rewarding to organ- 
izations, provided that the objectives of the policy are clearly understood and that the mar- 
keting mix is used to develop a strategy to enable management to implement the policy 
successfully. 

Pricing above competition generally requires a clear advantage on some nonprice ele- 
ment of the marketing mix. In some cases, it is possible due to a high price- quality asso- 
ciation on the part of potential buyers. But such an assumption is increasingly dangerous 
in today's information-rich environment. Consumer Reports and other similar publications 
make objective product comparisons much simpler for the consumer. There are also hun- 
dreds of dot.com companies that provide objective price comparisons. The key is to prove 
to customers that your product justifies a premium price. 

Pricing Below Competitors While some firms are positioned to price above com- 
petition, others wish to carve out a market niche by pricing below competitors. The goal 
of such a policy is to realize a large sales volume through a lower price and profit margins. 
By controlling costs and reducing services, these firms are able to earn an acceptable profit, 
even though profit per unit is usually less. 

Such a strategy can be effective if a significant segment of the market is price-sensitive 
and/or the organization's cost structure is lower than competitors. Costs can be reduced by 
increased efficiency, economics of scale, or by reducing or eliminating such things as credit, 
delivery, and advertising. For example, if a firm could replace its field sales force with tele- 



NEW PRODUCT PRICING 235 

marketing or online access, this function might be performed at lower cost. Such reduc- 
tions often involve some loss in effectiveness, so the tradeoff must be considered carefully. 

Historically, one of the worst outcomes that can result from pricing lower than a com- 
petitor is a "price war." Price wars usually occur when a business believes that price-cut- 
ting produces increased market share, but does not have a true cost advantage. Price wars 
are often caused by companies misreading or misunderstanding competitors. Typically, price 
wars are overreactions to threats that either aren't there at all or are not as big as they seem. 

Another possible drawback when pricing below competition is the company's inabil- 
ity to raise price or image. A retailer such as K-mart, known as a discount chain, found it 
impossible to reposition itself as a provider of designer women's clothiers. Can you image 
Swatch selling a $3,000 watch? 

How can companies cope with the pressure created by reduced prices? Some are 
redesigning products for ease and speed of manufacturing or reducing costly features that 
their customers do not value. Other companies are reducing rebates and discounts in favor 
of stable, everyday low prices (ELP). In all cases, these companies are seeking shelter from 
pricing pressures that come from the discount mania that has been common in the U.S. for 
the last two decades. 



NEW PRODUCT PRICING 



A r.omewhat different pricing situation relates to new product pricing. With a totally new 
product, competition does not exist or is minimal. What price level should be set in such 
cases? Two general strategies are most comn:on-penetration and skimming. Penetration 
pricing in the introductory stage of a new proQucl's lifecycle means accepting a lower profit 
.Margin and to price relatively low. Such a strategy should generate greater sales and estab- 
lish the new product in the market more quickly. Price skimming involves the top part of 
the demand curve. Price is set relatively high to generate a high profit margin and sales are 
limited to those buyers willing to pay a premium to get the new product (see Figure 9.3). 



NEWSLINE: THE RISK OF FREE PC'S 



There's no such thing as a free PC. But judging from the current flood 
of offers for free or deeply discounted computers, you might think 
that the laws of economics and common sense have been repealed. In 
fact, all of those deals come with significant strings attached and 
reqUire close examination. Some are Simply losers. Others can pro- 
vide substantial saVings, but only for the right customers. 

The offers come in two categories. In one type, consumers get a 
free computer along with free Internet access, but have to accept a 
constant stream of advertising on the screen. In the other category, 
the customer gets a free or deeply discounted PC in exchange for a 
long-term contract for paid Internet services. 

Most of these are attractive deals, but the up-front commitment to 
$700 or more worth of Internet service means they are not for every- 
one. One group that will find little value in the arrangement is college 
students, since nearly all schools provide free and often high-speed 
Met access. Others who could well end up losing from these deals are 
the lightest and heaviest users of the Internet. People who want 
Internet access only to read e-mail and do a little light Web browsing 



236 CHAPTER 9 PRICING THE PRODUCT 



would likely do better to buy an inexpensive computer and sign up for 
a $10-a-month limited-access account with a service provider. 

People who use the Internet a lot may also be poor candidates. 
That's because three years is a long commitment at a time when 
Internet access technology is changing rapidly. Heavy users are likely 
to be the earliest adopters of high-speed cable or digital subscrber 
line service as it becomes available in their areas. 

Sources: Stephen H. Weldstrom. "The High Cost of Free PCs." Business Week, 
September 13, 1999. p. 20; Steven Bruel. "Why Talk's Cheap," Business Week, 
Septeber 13. 1999, pp. 34-36; Mercedes M. Cardona and Jack Neff, "Every- 
thing's at a Premium," Advertising Age, August 2. 1999, pp. 12- 13. 



Which strategy is best depends on a number of factors. A penetration strategy would 
generally be supported by the following conditions: price- sensitive consumers, opportunity 
to keep costs low, the anticipation of quick market entry by competitors, a high likelihood 
for rapid acceptance by potential buyers, and an adequate resource base for the firm to meet 
the new demand and sales. 

A skimming strategy is most appropriate when the opposite conditions exist. A pre- 
mium product generally supports a skimming strategy. In this case, "premium" doesn'tjust 
denote high cost of production and materials; it also suggests that the product may be rare 
or that the demand is unusually high. An example would be a $500 ticket for the World 
Series or an $80,000 price tag for a limited-production sports car. Having legal protection 
via a patent or copyright may also allow for an excessively high price. Intel and their Pen- 
tium chip possessed this advantage for a long period of time. In most cases, the initial high 
price is gradually reduced to match new competition and allow new customers access to 
the product. 



Skimming 
Price 

c 

** Penetration 
ai Price 

IX. 




Demand Curve 



Skimming Penetration 

Quantity demanded in a given period of time (# of unit) 



Skimming generates a higher profit margin while penetration generates 
greater volume. 

FIGURE 9.3 Penetration and skimming: pricing strategies as theY relate to the demand 
curve 



PRICE FLEXIBILITY 237 



PRICE LINES 



You are already familiar with price lines. Ties may be priced at $15, $ 17, $20, and $22.50; 
tluejeans may be priced at $30, $32.95, $37.95, and $45 . Each price must be far enough 
apart so that buyers can see definite quality differences among products. Price lines tend 
to be associated with consumer shopping goods such as apparel, appliances, and carpeting 
rather than product lines such as groceries. Customers do very little comparison-shopping 
on the latter. 

Price lining serves several purposes that benefit both buyers and sellers. Customers 
want and expect a wide assortment of goods, particularly shopping goods. Many small price 
differences for a given item can be confusing. If ties were priced at $1 5, $15 .35, $15 .75 , 
and so on, selection would be more difficult; the customer could not judge quality differ- 
ences as reflected by such small increments in price. So, having relatively few prices reduces 
the confusion. 

From the seller's point of view, price lining holds several benefits. First, it is sim- 
pler and more efficient to use relatively fewer prices. The product/service mix can then 
be tailored to selected price points. Price points are simply the different prices that make 
up the line. Second, it can result in a smaller inventory than would otherwise be the case. 
It might increase stock turnover and make inventory control simpler. Third, as costs change, 
either increasing or decreasing the prices can remain the same, but the quality in the line 
can be changed. For example, you may have bought a $20 tie fifteen years ago. You can 
buy a $20 tie today, but it is unlikely that today's $20 tie is of the same fine quality as it 
was in the past. While customers are likely to be aware of the differences, they are nev- 
ertheless still able to purchase a $20 tie. During inflationary periods the quality/price point 
relationship changes. From the point of view of salespeople, offering price lines will make 
selling easier. Salespeople can easily learn a small number of prices. This reduces the like- 
lihood that they will misquote prices or make other pricing errors. Their selling effort is 
therefore more relaxed, and this atmosphere will influence customers positively. It also 
gives the salesperson flexibility. If a customer can't afford a $2,800 Gateway system, the 
$2,200 system is suggested. 



PRICE FLEXIBILITY 



Another pricing decision relates to the extent of price flexibility. A flexible pricing policy 
means that the price is bid or negotiated separately for each exchange. This is a common 
practice when selling to organizational markets where each transaction is typically quite 
large. In such cases, the buyer may initiate the process by asking for bidding on a product 
or service that meets certain specifications. Alternatively, a buyer may select a supplier and 
attempt to negotiate the best possible price. Marketing effectiveness in many industrial mar- 
kets requires a certain amount of price flexibility. 

Discounts and Allowances 

In addition to decisions related to the base price of products and services, marketing man- 
agers must also set policies related to the use of discounts and allowances. There are many 
different types of price reductions -each designed to accomplish a specific purpose. 

Quantity discounts are reductions in base price given as the resuL of a buyer purchasing 
some predetermined quantity of merchandise. A noncumulative quantity discount applies 



238 



CHAPTER 9 PRICING THE PRODUCT 



CONNECT NOW: GET A $100 REBATE ON A PALM Vllx HANDHELD. 

Now if you commit to a year's service; you can get a $1 00 credit on the wireless 
Palm Vllx handheld. Discover how easy it is to get connected to work with applications 
beyond email. likeTravelocitY. Fidelity andMapQuest.com. Customi.e your favorite 
wireless web content with the fvtypalnv' portal. Stop by a retailer today to find out how 
you can take the Internet almost anywhere. All for a new low price. Simply amazing. 




Simply Palm" 
palm.com 




AD 9.2 A rebate can be a very effective price discount. 



to each purchase and is intended to encourage buyers to make larger purchases. This means 
that the buyer holds the excess mercbardise until it is used, possibly cutting the inventory 
cost of the seller and preventing the buyer from switching to a competitor at least until the 
stock is used. A cumulative quantity discount applies to the total bought over a period of 
time. The buyer adds to the potential discount with each additional purchase. Such a pol- 
icy helps to build repeat purchases. Building material dealers, for example, find such a pol- 
icy quite useful in encouraging builders to concentrate their purchase with one dealer and 



PRICE FLEXIBILITY 239 

to continue with the same dealer over time. It should be noted that such cumulative quan- 
tity discounts are extremely difficult to defend if attacked in the courts. 

Seasonal discounts are price reductions given or out-of-season merchandise . An exam- 
ple would be a discount on snowmobiles during the summer. The intention of such discounts 
is to spread demand over the year. This can allow fuller use of production facilities and 
improved cash flow during the year. Electric power companies use the logic of seasonal 
discounts to encourage customers to shift consumption to off-peak periods. Since these com- 
panies must have production capacity to meet peak demands, the lowering of the peak can 
lessen the generating capacity required. 

Cash discounts are reductions on base price given to customers for paying cash or 
within some short time period. For example, a two-percent discount on bills paid within 
ten days is a cash discount. The purpose is generally to accelerate the cash flow of the 
organization. 

Trade discounts are price reductions given to middlemen (e.g., wholesalers, indus- 
trial distributors, retailers) to encourage them to stock and give preferred treatment to an 
organization' s products . For example, a consumer goods company may give a retailer a 20% 
discount to place a larger order for soap. Such a discount might also be used to gain shelf 
space or a preferred position in the store. 

Personal allowances are similar devices aimed at middlemen. Their purpose is to 
encourage middlemen to aggressively promote the organization's products. For example, 
a furniture manufacturer may offer to pay some specified amount toward a retailer's adver- 
tising expenses if the retailer agrees to include the manufacturer's brand name in the ads. 



BEAM ME UP, SCOITYI 



You remember William Shatner, a.k.a. Captain James T. Kirk. 
As Kirk, he represented the epitome of integrity and profes- 
sionalism. Death was better than compromise. Yet, here he 
is doing rather strange TV ads for Pliceline.com. Inc. Why? 
Probably because he's being paid a ton of money, and he's 
having fun. Working for an apparent winner is also exciting. 

We say "apparent" because transferring Priceline's 
patented "name your own price" system of selling airline tick- 
ets, groceries, cars, gasoline, telephone minutes, and a raft of 
other products is proving quite difficult. Complicating mat- 
ters, several airlines and hotels are studying whether to launch 
Web services that could cut the legs out from under Price- 
line's established travel businesses. 

Priceline could soon face stiff competition from its own 
suppliers. Hyatt, Marriott, Starwood, and Cendant-most of 
which sell excess hotel rooms through Priceline-are having 
serious discussions about starting their own company to dis- 
tribute over the Internet. Essentially, these chains worry that 
by handing sales to Priceline, they could lose control of their 
customers. Several airlines have the same concerns. 

To stay one step ahead, Priceline has decided to introduce 
18 new products. Initially, Priceline generated 90% of its rev- 



enues from airline tickets, rental cars, and hotel rooms. By 
2003, Priceline estimates that only 50% of revenues win come 
from these sources. 

By June 2000, users were able to name their price for long- 
distance phone service, gasoline, and cruises. At the end of 
2000, Priceline.com started selling blocks of long-distance 
phone time to small companies. Later, it will offer them ad 
space, freight services, and office equipment. New joint ven- 
tures are in the works with companies in Hong Kong, Aus- 
tralia, Japan, Europe, and Latin America. 

Execs at Priceline say they're on the right track and that 
they're building a broad-based discounting powerhouse. 

Sources: Pamela L. Moore, "Name Your Price-For Everything?" 
Business Week ApriJ 17,2000, pp. 72-75; "Priceline.com to Let 
Callers Name Price," Los Angeles Times, Nov. 9, 1999, p. 3; 
"Priceline to offer auto insurance," Wall Street Journal, Aug. 3, 
2000, p. J2; "Priceline teams up with 3 phone companies to sell 
long distance," Wall Street Journal, May 2000, p. 16. 



240 CHAPTER 9 PRICING THE PRODUCT 



Some manufacturers or wholesalers also give prize money called spijfs for retailers to pasr. 
on to the retailer's sales clerks for aggressively selling eel lain items. This is especially com- 
mon in the electronics and clothing industries, where it is used primarily with new prod- 
ucts, slow movers, or high margin items . 

Trade-in allowances alSO reduce the base price of a product or service. These are often 
dsed to allow the seller to negotiate the best price with a buyer. The trade-in may, of course, 
be of value if it can be resold. Accepting trade-ins is necessary in marketing many types 
of products. A construction company with a used grader worth $70,000 would not likely 
buy a new model from an equipment company that did not accept trade-ins, particularly 
when other companies do accept them . 



PRICE BUNDLING 



A very popular pricing strategy, price bundling, is to group similar or complementary prod- 
ucts and to charge a total price that is lower if they were sold separately. Dell Computers 
and Gateway Computers follow this strategy by combining different components for a set 
price. Customers assume that these computer experts are putting together an effective prod- 
uct package and they are paying less. The underlying assumption of this pricing strategy 
is that the increased sales generated will more than compensate for a lower profit margin. 
It may also be a way of selling a less popular product by combining it with popular ones. 
Clearly, industries such as financial services and telecommunications are big users of this. 



PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF PRICING 



Price, as is the case with certain other elements in the marketing mix, appears to have mean- 
ing to many buyers that goes beyond a simple utilitarian statement. Such meaning is often 
referred to as the psychological aspect of pricing. Inferring quality from price is a com- 
mon example of the psychological aspect. A buyer may assume that a suit priced at $500 
is of higher quality than one priced at $300. From a cost-of-production, raw material, or 
workmanship perspective, this mayor may not be the case. The seller may be able to secure 
the higher price by nonprice means such as offering alterations and credit or the benefit to 
the buyer may be in meeting some psychological need such as ego enhancement. In some 
situations, the higher price may oe paid simply due to lack of information or lack of com- 
parative shopping skills. For some products or services, the quantity demanded may act.l- 
ally rise to some extent as price is increased. This might be the case with an item such as 
a fur coat. Such a pricing strategy is called prestige pricing. 

Products and services frequemly have customary prices in the minds of consumers. 
A customary price is one that customers identify with particular items. For example, for 
many decades a five-stick package of chewing gum cost five cents and a six-ounce bottle 
of Coca-Cola cost five cents. Candy bars now cost 60 cents or more, a customary price for 
a standard-sized bar. Manufacturers tend to adjust their wholesale prices to permit retail- 
ers in using customary pricing. However, as we have witnessed duriDg the past decade, prices 
have changed so often that customary prices are weakened. 

Another manifestation of the psychological aspects of pricing is the use of oddprices. 3 
We call prices that end in such digits as 5, 7, 8, and 9 "odd prices" (e.g., $2.95, $15.98, or 
$299.99). Even prices are $3, $16, or $300. For a long time marketing people have attempted 
to explain why odd prices are used. It seems to make little difference whether one pays 
$29.95 or $30 for an item. Perhaps one of the most often heard explanations concerns the 



PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF PRICING 



241 







ti*r 



HISTORY 
REPEATS ITSELF. 

AGAIN. 

CHEVY SILVERADO HD. 
2001 MMORWEND TRUCK OF THE YEAR 

THE TRUCK .-.,..:,,..,. 



SILVERADO HD 



LIKE A ROCK 



AD 9.3 Winning an award is a psychological aspect of price. 



psychological impact of odd prices on customers. The explanation is that customers per- 
ceive even prices such as $5 or $1 as regular prices. Odd prices, on the other hand, appear 
to represent bargains or savings and therefore encourage buying. There seems to be some 
movement toward even pricing; however, odd pricing is still very common. A somewhat 
related pricing strategy is combination pricing. Examples are two-far-one, buy-one-get-one- 
free. Consumers tend to react very positively to these pricing techniques. 



242 CHAPTER 9 PRICING THE PRODUCT 



1, Developing a pricing strategy 4. Price flexibility allows for different prices charged for dif- 

a. Nonprice competition ferent customers and/or under different situations. 

b. Competitive pricing 5, p r i ce bundling groups similar or complementary products 

2, New product pricing and cnar § es a total P rice that is lower than if the y were 
" a. Penetration sold separately. 

b. Skimming 6. Certain pricing strategies, such as prestige pricing, cus- 
tomary pJlcing, or odd pricing, play on the psychological 

3, Price lining means a number of sequential price points are perspectives of the consumer 
offered within a product category. 



ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES TO DETERMINING PRICE 

Price deteonination decisions can be based on a number of factors, including cost, demand, 
competition, value, or some combination of factors. However, while many marketers are 
aware that they should consider these factors, pricing remains somewhat of an art. For pur- 
poses of discussion, we categorize the alternative approaches to detennining price as follows: 
(1) cost-oriented pricing; (2) demand-oriented pricing; and (3) value-based approaches. 

Cost-Oriented Pricing: Cost-Pius and Mark-Ups 

The cost-plus method, sometimes called gross margin pricing, is perhaps most widely used 
by marketers to set price. The manager selects as a goal a particular gross margin that will 
produce a desirable profit level. Gross margin is the difference between how much the goods 
cost and the actual price for which it sells. This gross margin is designated by a percent of 
net sales. The percent selected varies among types of merchandise. That means that one 
product may have a goal of 48% gross margin while another has a target of 33M % or 7.%. 

A primary reason that the cost-plus method is attractive to marketers is that they do 
not have to forecast general business conditions or customer demand. I f sales volume pro- 
jections are reasonably accurate, profits will be on target. Consumers may also view this 
method as fair, since the price they pay is related to the cost of producing the item. Like- 
wise, the marketer is sure that costs are covered. 

A major disadvantage of cost-plus pricing is its inherent inflexibility. For example, 
department stores have often found difficulty in meeting competition from discount stores, 
catalog retailers, or furniture warehouses because of their commitment to cost-pius pric- 
ing. Another disadvantage is that it does not take into account consumers' perceptions of a 
product's value. Finally, a company's costs may fluctuate so constant price changing is not 
a viable strategy. 

When middlemen use the teon mark-Up, they are referring to the difference between 
the average cost and price of all merchandise in stock, for a particular department, or for 
an individual item. The difference may be expressed in dollars or as a percentage. For exam- 
ple, a man's tie costs $4.60 and is sold for $8. The dollar mark-up is $3.40. The mark-up 
may be designated as a percent of selling price 0; as a percent of cost of the merchandise. 
In this example, the mark-up is 74% of cost ($3.40/$4.60) or 42.5% of the retail price 
($3.40/$8). 



ALTERNATIVE APPROACHESTO DETERMINING PRICE 243 

There are several reasons why expressing mark-up as a percentage of selling price is 
preferred to expressing it as a percentage of cost. One is that many other ratios are expressed 
as a percentage of sales. For instance, selling expenses are expressed as a percentage of sales. 
If selling costs are 8% , this means that for each $ 100,000 in net sales, the cost of selling the 
merchandise is $8,000. Advertising expenses, operating expenses, and other types of expenses 
are quoted in the same way. Thus, there is a consistency when making comparisons in express- 
ing all expenses and costs, including mark-up, as a percentage of sales (selling price) . 

Middlemen receive merchandise daily and make sales daily. As new shipments are 
received, the goods are marked and put into stock. Cumulative mark-up is the term applied 
to the difference between total dollar delivered cost of all merchandise and the total dollar 
price of the goods put into stock for a specified period of time. The original mark-up at 
which individual items are put into stock is referred to as the initial mark-up. 

Maintained mark-up is another important concept. The maintained mark-up percentage 
is an essential figure in estimating operating profits. It also provides an indication of effi- 
ciency. Maintained mark-up, sometimes called gross cost of goods, is the difference oetwecn 
the actual price for which all of the merchandise is sold and the total dollar delivered cost 
of the goods exclusive of deductions. The maintained mark-up is typically less than the ini- 
tial mark-up due to mark-downs and stock shrinkages from theft, breakage, and the like. 
Maintained mark-up is particularly important for seasonal merchandise that will likely be 
marked-down substantially at the end of the season. 

Although this pricing approach may seem overly simplified, it has definite merit. The 
problem facing managers of certain types of businesses such as retail food stores is that 
they must price a very large number of items and change many of those prices frequently. 
The standard mark-up usually reflects historically profitable margins and provide" a good 
gui.deline for pricing. 

To illustrate this cost-based process of pricing, let's look at the case of Johnnie Walker 
Black Label Scotch Whiskey. This product sells for about $30 in most liquor stores. How 
was this price derived? 

$5.00 production, distillation, maturation + $2.50 advertising + $3.1 1 distribution 
+ $4.39 taxes + $7.50 mark-up (retailer) + $7.50 net margin (manufacturer) 

Certainly costs are an important component of pricing. No firm can make a profit 
until it covers its costs. However, the process of determining costs and then setting a price 
based on costs does not take into consideration what the customer is willing to pay at the 
marketplace. As a result, many companies that have set out to develop a product have fallen 
victim to the desire to continuously add features to the product, thus adding cost. When the 
product is finished, these companies add some percentage to the cost and expect customers 
to pay the resulting price. These companies are often disappointed, as customers are not 
willing to pay this cost-based price. 

Break-Even Analysis 

A somewhat more sophisticated approach to cost-based pricing is the break-even analysis. 
The information required for the formula for break-even analysis is available from the account- 
ing records in most firms. The break-even price is the price that will produce enough rev- 
enue to cover all costs at a given level of production. Total cost can be divided into fixed 
and variable (total cost = fixed cost + variable cost). Recall thatfixed cost does not change 
as the level of production goes up or down. The rent paid for the building to house the oper- 
ation might be an example. No cost is fixed in the long run, but in the short run, many expenses 
cannot iealistically be changed. Variable cost does change as production is increased or 



244 CHAPTER 9 PRICING THE PRODUCT 



decreased. For example, the cost of raw material to make ihe product will vary with 
production. 

A second shortcoming of break-even analysis is it assumes that variable costs are con- 
stant. However, wages will increase with overtime and shipping discounts will be obtained. 
Third, break-even assumes that all costs can be neatly categorized as fixed or variable. Where 
advertising expenses are entered, break-even analysis will have a significant impact on the 
resulting break-even price and volume. 

Target Rates of Return 

Break-even pricing is a reasonable approach when there is a limit on the quantity which a 
finn can provide and particularly when a target return objective is sought. Assume, for exam- 
ple, that the firm with the costs illustrated in the previous example detennines that it can 
provide no more than 10,000 units of the product in the next period of operation. Further- 
more, the firm has set a target for profit of 20% above total costs. Referring again to inter- 
nal accounting records and the changing cost of production at near capacity levels, a new 
total cost curve is calculated. From the cost curve profile, management sets the desirable 
level of produclion at 80% of capacity or 8,000 units. From the total cost curve, it is deter- 
mined that the cost for producing 8,000 units is $ 18,000. Twenty percent of $18,000 is $3,600. 
Adding this to the total cost at 8,000 units yields the point at that quantity through which 
the total revenue curve must pass. Finally, $21 ,600 divided by 8,000 units yields the price 
of $2.70 per unit; here the $3,600 in profit would be realized. The obvious shortcoming of 
the target return approach to pricing is the absence of any infOlmation concerning the demand 
for the product at the desired price. It is assumed that all of the units will be sold at the 
price which provides the desired return. 

It would be necessary, therefore, to determine whether the desired price is in fact attrac- 
tive to potential customers in the marketplace. If break-even pricing is to be used, it should 
be supplemented by additional information concerning customer perceptions of the rele- 
vant range of prices for the product. The source of this information would most commonly 
be survey research, as well as a thorough review of pricing practices by competitors in the 
industry. In spite of their shortcomings, break -even pricing and target return pricing are very 
common business practices. 



Demand-Oriented Pricing 

Demand-oriented pricing focuses on the nature of the demand curve for the product or ser- 
vice being priced. The nature of the demand curve is influenced largely by the structure of 
the industry in which a finn competes . That is , if a firm operates in an industry that is 
extremely competitive, price may be used to some strategic advantage in acquiring and main- 
taining market share. On the other hand, if the firm operates in an environment with a few 
dominant players, the range in which price can vary may be minimal. 



Value-Based Pricing 

If we consider the three approaches to setting price, cost-based is focused entirely OH the 
perspective of the company with very little concern for the customer; demand-based is focused 
on the customer, but only as a predictor of sales; and value-based focuses entirely on the 
customer as a determinant of the total price/value package. Marketers who employ value- 
based pricing might use the following definition: "It is what you think your product is worth 
to that customer at that time." Moreover, it acknowledges several marketing/price truths: 



ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES TO DETERMINING PRICE 245 

• To the customer, price is the only unpleasant part of buying. 

• Price is the easiest marketing tool to copy. 

• Price represents everything about the product. 

Still, value-based pricing is not altruistic. It asks and answer, two questions: (1) what is 
the highest price I can charge and still make the sale? and (2) am I willing to sell at that 
price? The first question must take two primary factors into account: customers and com- 
petitors. The second question is influenced by two more: costs and constraints. Let's dis- 
cuss each briefly. 

Many customer-related factors are important in value-based pricing. For example, 
it is critical to understand the customer buying process. How important is price? When is 
it considered? How is it used? Another factor is the cost ofswitching. Have you ever watched 
the TV program "The Price is Right"? If you have, you know that most consumers have 
poor price knowledge. Moreover, their knowledge of comparable prices within a product 
category--e.g., ketchup-is typically worse. Soprice knowledge is a relevant factor. Finally, 
the marketer must assess the customers' price expectations. How much do you expect to 
pay for a large pizza? Color TV? DVD? Newspaper? Swimming pool? These expectations 
create a phenomenon called "sticker shock" as exhibited by gasoline, automobiles, and 
ATM fees. 

A second factor influencing value-based pricing is competitors. As noted in earlier 
chapters, defining competition is not always easy. Of course there are like-category com- 
petitors such as Toyota and Nissan. We have already discussed the notion of pricing above, 
below, and at the same level of these direct competitors. However, there are also indirect 
competitors that consumers may use to base price comparisons. For instance, we may use 
the price of a vacation as a basis for buying vacation clothes. The cost of eating out is com- 
pared to the cost of groceries. There are also instances when a competitor, especially a mar- 
ket leader, dictates the price for everyone else. Weyerhauser determines the price for lumber. 
Kellogg establishes the price for cereal. 

If you're building a picnic table, it is fairly easy to add up your receipts and calcu- 
late costs. For a global corporation, determining costs is a great deal more complex. For 
example, calculating incremental costs and identifying avoidable costs are valuable tasks. 
Incremental cost is the cost of producing each additional unit. If the incremental cost begins 
to exceed the incremental revenue, it is a clear sign to quit producing. Avoidable costs are 
those that are unnecessary or can be passed onto some other institution in the marketing 
channel. Adding costly features to a product that the customer cannot use is an example of 
the former. As to the latter, the banking industry has been passing certain costs onto customers. 

Another consideration is opportunity costs. Because the company spent money on 
store remodeling, they are not able to take advantage of a discounted product purchase. Finally, 
costs vary from market-to-market as well as quantities sold. Research should be conducted 
to assess these differences. 

Although it would be nice to assume that a business has the freedom to set any price 
it chooses, this is not always the case. There are a variety of constraints that prohibit such 
freedom. Some constraints are formal, such as government restrictions in respect to strate- 
gies like collusion and price-fixing. This occurs when two or more companies agree to charge 
the same or very similar prices. Other constraints tend to be informal. 5xamples include 
matching the price of competitors, a traditional price charged for a particular product, and 
charging a price that covers expected costs. 

Ultimately, value-based pricing offers the following three tactical recommendations: 

• Employ a segmented approach toward price, based on such criteria as customer type, 
location, and order size. 



246 CHAPTER 9 PRICING THE PRODUCT 



1. Approaches to determining price include: 

a. Cost-plus and mark-ups 

b. Demand-oriented pricing 

c. Value-based approaches to pricing 



• Establish highest possible price level and justify it with comparable value. 

• Use price as a basis for establishing strong customer relationships. 4 



THE FUTURE OF PRICING 



For too long, pricing decisions have been dominated by economists, discounters, and finan- 
cial analysts. While making a reasonable profit remains a necessity, pricing must become 
a more strategic element of marketing. Smarter pricing, as portrayed by the value-based 
strategy, appears to represent the future. A case in point is the Ford Motor Co. , which man- 
aged to earn $7.2 billion in 2000, more than any automaker in history. Despite a loss of 
market share, the key to their success was a 420,000-unit decrease in sales of low-margin 
vehicles such as Escorts and Aspires, and a 600,000-unit increase in sales of high-margin 
vehicles such as Crown Victorias and Explorers. Ford cut prices on its most profitable vehi- 
cles enough to spur demand, but not so much that they ceased to have attractive margins. 




THE WALL STREET JOURNAL. 



IN PRACTICE 

Customers make judgmentr, about 
pricing based on perceived value, 
not production costs. For organiza- 
tions, however, pricing determines 
the primary source of revenue for 
the business. Various market seg- 
ments and their respective price 
sensitivities must be considered 
when marketers decide on a pricing 
strategy. 

Increasingly, marketers are 
responsible for pricing. Marketers 
must understand strategies previ- 
ously reserved for economlsls and 
financial analysts. Questions of 
price points, price lining, and price 
bundling now fall to marketers. 

What do marketers need to 
know to price products to maxi- 
mize profits and capture market 
share? Break-even analyses, target 
rates of return, and mark-ups are a 
few of the processes marketers 
must master. 

To learn more about profits 
and pricing, click on the Interactive 
Journal's link to Money & Invest- 
ing on the Front Section. 

In this section you'll find infor- 
mation about interest rates, eco- 
nomic conditions, and venture 
capital. Because interest rates 
affect consumer spending, it is 
important to understand economic 
indicators and their impact 

The Business Focus section of 
Marketplace is a good resource for 
articles that discuss various busi- 
ness marketing issues, including 
pricing. 

Naming your own price is the 
strategy for Priceline.com. Cus- 
tomers name their own price for 
plane tickets, hotel rooms, and 
rental cars. Initially, the compary 
relished great success. Powever,ii 



has recently suffered financial 
losses, due in part to the "Name 
Your Own Price" strategy. Visit the 
site now at www.priceline.com. 

Facilitating exchanges between 
customers is a successful business 
strategy for eBay. Calling itself "the 
worid's online marketplace," eBay 
has created a trading medium for 
anyone interested in buying or sell- 
ing items online. Items range from 
one-of-a-kind collectibles to every- 
day items such as musical instru- 
ments and sporting goods. Check 
out the Web site now at 
www.ebay.com. 

DELIVERABLE 

The airline industry competes 
heavily on price. Select two airlines 
and research fares for one round 
trip tie'eet on each airline, any des- 
tination. Visit several Web sites that 
sell airline tickets and compare 
fares. Compare these prices to 
those offered on the airlines' Web 
sites. Check your local newspaper 
for fare prices, too. Write a one- 
page overview of your findings. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 

1. How do organizations decide 
whether to price to meet, price 
above, or price below competi- 
lion? How do organizations 
measure the success or failure 
of their chosen strategy? 

2. Are you price sensitive to any 
products? Do you engage in 
conparative shopping, search- 
ing for the "beSi deal"? 

3. How has the Internet affected 
pricing strategies? How do 
Internet companies compete 
with traditional "brick and 
mortar" companies in pricing? 



247 



248 CHAPTER 9 PRICING THE PRODUCT 

SUMMARY 



The chapter begins by defining price from the perspective of the consumer, society, and the business. 
Each contributes to our understanding of price and positions it as a competitive advantage. 

The objectives of price are fivefold: (1) survival, (2) profit, (3) sales, (4) market share, and (5) 
image. In addition, a pricing strategy can target to: meet competition, price above competition, and 
price below competition. 

Several pricing tactics were discussed. They include new product pricing, price lining, price 
flexibility, price bundling, and the psychological aspects of pricing. 

The chapter concludes with a description of the three alternative approaches to pricing: cost- 
oriented, demand-oriented, and value-based. 



MARKETER'S VOCABULARY 



Demand curve Quantity demanded at various price levels. 

Nonprice competition Organization uses strategies other than price to attract customers. 

Price war Pricing significantly lower than competition. 

Penetration pricing Accepting a lower profit margin during the introduction of a product. 

Price skimming Price set relatively high to generate a high profit margin. 

Price lining Selling a product with several price points. 

Quantity discounts Reduction in base price given as the result of a buyer purchasing some pre- 
determined quantity of merchandise. 

Seasonal discounts Price discount given on out-of-season merchandise. 

Cash discounts Reduction on base price given io customers for paying cash or paying within a 
short period of time. 

Trade discount Price reductions given to middlemen to encourage them to stock and give pre- 
ferred treatment to an organization's product. 

Spiffs Prize money given to retailers to pass on to the retailer's sales personnel for selling eel lain 
items. 

Price bundling Grouping similar complementary products and charging a total price that is 
lower than if they were sold separately. 

Mark-up Difference between the average cost and price of a product. 

Break-even price Price that will produce enough revenue to cover all costs at a given level of 
production. 

Value-based pricing What that product is worth to that customer at that point in time. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 

1. Why is price an important part of the marketing mix? 

2. Who typically has responsibility for setting prices in most organizations? Why? 

3. Discuss the objectives which pricing policies can be established to accomplish. 



CASE APPLICATION 249 

4. What conditions are necessary if a "pricing above the competition" strategy is to be successful? 

5. Discuss the alternative strategies that can be adopted in new product pricing. Under what con- 
ditions should each be used? 

6. List some advantages of psychological pricing. What are some of the risks? 

7. What are some of the more common types of discounts and allowances and the purpose of each? 

8. What is price lining? What benefits does price lining hold for customers? 

9. What advantage might a uniform delivered price have for a seller? 



PROJECT 



Interview a marketing person responsible for pricing in their organization. 

Assess the type of pricing strategy they use and why. Write a three- to five-page report. 



CASE APPLICATION 



UNITE DTECHTRONICS 

United Techtronics faced a major pricing decision with respect to its new video screen television. 
"We're really excited here at United Techtronics," exclaimed Roy Cowing, founder and president of 
United Techtronics. "We've made a most significant technological breakthrough in large screen, video 
television systems." He went on to explain that the marketing plan for this product was now his major 
area of concern and that what price to charge was the marketing question that was giving him the 
most difficulty. 

Cowing founded United Techtronics (UT) in Boston in 1959. Prior to that time, Cowing had 
been an associate professor of electrical engineering at M.LT. Cowing founded UT to manufacUlre 
and market products making use of some of the electronic inventions he had developed while at M.I.T. 
Dales were made mostly to the space program and the military. 

For a number of years, Cowing had been trying to reduce the company's dependency on gov- 
ernment sales. One of the diversification projects that he had committed research and development 
monies to was the so-called video screen project. The objective of this project was to develop a sys- 
tem whereby a television picture could be displayed on a screen as big as eight to ten feet diagonally. 
One of UT's engineers made the necessary breakthrough and developed working prototypes. Up to 
that point, UT had invested $600,000 in the project. 

Extra-large television systems were not new There were a number of companies who sold such 
systems both to the consumer and commercial (taverns, restaurants, and so on) markets. Most cur- 
rent systems made use of a special magnifying screen. The result of this process is that the final pic- 
ture lacked much of the brightness of the original small screen. As a result, the picture had to be viewed 
in a darkened room. There were some other video systems that did not use the magnifying process. 
These systems used special tubes, but they also suffered from a lack of brightness. 

UT had developed a system that was bright enough to be viewed in regular daylight on a screen 
up to ten feet diagonally. Cowing was unwilling to discuss how this was accomplished. He would 
only say that a patent protected the process and that he thought it would take at least two to three 
years for any competitor to duplicate the results of the system. 

A number of large and small companies were active in this area. Admiral, General Electric, 
RCA, Zenith, and Sony were all thought to be working on developing large-screen systems directed 
at the consumer market. Sony was rumored to be ready to introduce a 60-inch diagonal screen yys- 
tern that would retail for about $2,500. A number of small companies were already producing sys- 
tems. Advent Corporation, a small New England company, claimed to have sold 4,000 84-inch diagonal 



250 CHAPTER 9 PRICING THE PRODUCT 



REFERENCES 



units at prices from $1 ,500 to $2,500, Cowing was adamant that none of these systems gave as bright 
a picture as UT's, He estimated that about 10,000 large screen systems were sold in 1996. 

Cowing expected about 50% of the suggested retail-selling price to go for wholesaler and retailer 
margins. He expected that UT's direct manufacturing costs would vary depending on the volume pro- 
duced. He expected direct labor costs to fall at higher production volumes due to the increased automa- 
tion of the process and improved worker skiljs. 

Material costs were expected to fall due to less waste due to automation. The equipment costs 
necessary to automate the product process were $70,000 to produce in the 0-5,000 unit range; an 
additional $50,000 to produce in the 5,001-10,000 unit range; and an additional $40,000 to produce 
in the 10,001 -20,000 unit range. The useful life of this equipment was put at five years. Cowing was 
sure that production costs were substantially below those of Current competitors including Sony. Such 
was the magnitude of UT's technological breakthrough. Cowing was unwilling to produce over 20,000 
units a year in the first few years due to the limited cash resources of the company to support inven- 
tories and so on. 

Cowing wanted to establish a position in the consumer market for his product. He felt that the 
long-run potential was greater there than in the commercial market. With this end in mind, he hired 
a small economic research-consulting firm to undertake a consumer study to determine the likely reac- 
tion to alternative retail prices for the system. These consultants took extensive pricing histories of 
competitive products. They concluded that, "UT's video screen system would be highly price-elas- 
tic across a range of prices from $500 [0 v-5,000 bOlh in a primary and secondary demand sense." 
They went on to estimate the price elasticity of demand in this range to be between 4.0 and 6.5. 

Mr. Cowing was considering a number of alternative suggested retail prices. "I can see argu- 
ments for pricing anywhere from above Advent'?, to substantially below Muntz'i lowest price,' he 
said. A decision on pricing was needed soon. 

Questions: 

1. Should penetration pricing be used or would skimming be better? 

2. What should be the base price for the new product? 



1. Thomas Nagle, "Pricing as Creaiive Marketing," Business Horizons, 3. Bernard F. Whalen, "Strategic Mix of Odd, Even Plices Can Lead to 
July-August 1923, pp. 14-19. Retail Profits," Marketing NeK'S, March 1976, p. 24. 

2. Robell A. Robicheaux, "How Important is Pricing in Competitive 4. Peter Coy, "The Power of Smart Marketing," Business Week, April 
Strategy?" Proceedings of the Southern hlarketing Association 10,2000, pp. 160-162. 

1975, pp. 55-5 7 



REFERENCES 251 




LOWEST PRICES {200^^ 



_ 




Olfiif 




"U. OMlif 

E. S. Robbins 



OXilf 

$ 99 







SAVE 40% 70% EVERYDAY WITH 



White supplies Int. Colon and styles may vary. 




Aarotf s 

m 



YOU SAC 

B£c*ustvrtt»moiTF»sn 




ANDERSON H I C U T 

Files 

Rental - Return 



fiom 



$ 49 



"v^j 



MactoviA 
Conference Tables 

Rental - Return 



fiom 



*99 



Executive Chairs 
Rental - Return 



fiom 



$ 49 




Panel/Partitions 

Variety ofShapcs ft Sties. 



fiom 



$ 19 



Aaron 

Of fice Furniture 

RENTAU'SALCV-LCABINO 



5pB 



YourQne Source for Workplace Solutions, 



Aurora 

520 South Chambers Road 
303-306-6488 

1-877-REN-FURN 

www.aaronofficefurniture.com 



AD 9.4 A traditional retail ad. 



CHAPTER 



10 



CHANNEL CONCEPTS: 
DISTRIB UTING THE PROD UCT 



LEARNING OBJECTIVES 



After reading this chapter, you should: 

Gain insight into the role of distribution channels. 

Understand the methods used in organizing channels. 

Understand the management of underlying behavioral dimensions 
present in most channels. 

Comprehend the elements of a channel strategy 

Understand the tasks assigned to various channel institutions. 



SAM SIGHTINGS ARE EVERYWHERE 



W e began this book with some insights on Elvis Presley and related marketing 
problems. Compared to Sam Walton, Elvis sightings are nonexistent. The spirit of Sam 
Walton permeates virtually every corner of America. This small-town retailer has pro- 
duced a legacy of U.S. sales of $1 18 billion, or 1% of all retail sales. In the U.S., Wal- 
Mart has 1,921 discount stores, 512 supercenters, and 446 Sam's Clubs. Wal-Mart 
recently challenged local supermarkets by opening their new format: Neighborhood Mar- 
kets. Overall, they have more than 800,000 people working in more than 3,500 stores On 
four continents. 

Today, Wal-Mart is the largest seller of underwear, soap, toothpaste, children's 
clothes, books, videos, and compact discs. How can you challenge their Internet offerings 
that now number more than 500,000, with planned expansion of more than 3,000,000? Or 
the fact that 01' Roy (named after Sam's Irish setter) is now the best-selling dog food 
brand in America? Besides 01' Roy, Wal-Mart's garden fertilizer has also become the 
best-selling brand in the U.S. in its category, as has its Spring Valley line of vitamins. 

So how do you beat a behemoth like Wal-Mart? One retail expert tackled this ques- 
tion in his autobiography. He suggests 10 ways to accomplish this goal: (1) have a strong 
commitment to your business; (2) involve your staff in decision making; (3) listen to 
your staff and your customers; (4) learn now to communicate; (5) appreciate a good job; 
(6) have fun; (7) set high goals for staff; (8) promise a lot, but de ; iver more; (9) watch your 
expenses; and (10) find out what the competition is doing and do something different. 

The author of this al'tobiography: Made in America- Sam Walton. 



252 



THE DUAL FUNCTIONS OF CHANNELS 253 

Sources: Murray Raphel, "Up Againsllhc WaJ-Mart," Direct Marketing, April 1999, pp. 82-84; Adricnnc Sanders, "Yankee 
Imperialists," Forbes December 13,1999, p. 36; Jack Neff, "Wal-:vlart Stores Go Private (Label)," Advertising Age, November 
29,1999, pp. 1,34,36; Alice 7. Cuneo, "WaJ-Mart's Goal: To Reign Over Web," Advertising Age, July 5.1999, pp. 1,27. 



INTRODUCTION 



This scenario highlights the importance of identifying the mest efficient and effective man- 
ner in which to place a product into the hands of the customer. This mechanism of con- 
necting the producer with the customer is referred to as the channel oj distribution. Earlier 
we referred to the creation of time and place utility. This is the primary purpose of the chan- 
nel. It is an extremely complex process, and in the case of many companies, it is tile only 
element of marketing where cost savings are still possible. 

In this chapter, we will look at the evoluLion of the channel of distribution. We shall 
see that several basic functions have emerged that are typically the responsibility of a chan- 
nel member. Also, it will become clear that channel selection is not a static, once-and-for- 
all choice, but that :t is a dynamic part of marketing planning. As was true for the product, 
the channel must be managed in order to work. Unlike the product, the channel is com- 
posed of individuals aad groups that exhibit unique traits that might be in conflict, and that 
have a constant need to be motivated. These issues will also be addressed. Finally, the insti- 
tutions or members of the channel will be introduced and discussed. 



THE DUAL FUNCTIONS OF CHANNELS 



Just as with the other elements of the firm's marketing program, distribution activities are 
undertaken to facilitate the exchange between marketers and consumers. There are two basic 
functions performed between the manufacturer and the ultimate consumer, i (See Figure 10. 1 .) 
The first, called the exchange junction, involves sales of the product to the various mem- 
bers of the channel of distribution. The second, the physical distribution junction, moves 
products through the exchange channel , simultaneously with title and ownership. Decisions 
concerning both of these sets of activities are made in conjunction with the firm's overall 
marketing plan and are designed so that the firm can best serve its customers in the mar- 
ket place. In actuality, without a channel of distribution the exchange process would be far 
more difficult and ineffective. 

The key role that distribution plays is satisfying a firm's customers and achieving a 
profit for the firm. From a distribution perspective, customer satisfaction involves maximizing 
time and place utility to: the organization's suppliers, intermediate customers, and final 



EXCHANGE FUNCTION 



PRODUCER 



h 





h— 








* 


4 ' 


' 


RESELLERS 


>. 


CUSTOMERS 



X 

physical distribution function 

FIGURE 10.1 Dual-flow system : :i marketing channels 



254 CHAPTER 10 CHANNEL CONCEPTS: DISTRIBUTING THE PRODUCT 



customers. In short, organizations attempt to get their products to their customers in the most 
effective ways. Further, as households find their needs satisfied by an increased quantity and 
variety of goods, the mechanism of exchange-i.e., the channel-increases in importance. 



THE EVOLUTION OFTHE MARKETING CHANNEL 



As consumers, we have clearly taken for granted that when we go to a supermarket the shelves 
will be filled with products we want; when we are thirsty there will be a Coke machine <}■ 
bar around the corner; and, when we don't have time to shop, we can pick-up the telephone 
and order from the J.e. Penney cataiog or through the Internet. Of course, if we give it some 
thought, we realize that this magic is not a given, and that hundreds of thousands of peo- 
ple plan, organize, and labor long hours so that this modern convenience is available to you, 
the consumer. It hasn't always been this way, and it is still not this way in many other coun- 
tries. Perhaps a little anthropological discussion will help our understanding. 

The channel structure in a primitive culture is virtually nonexistent. The family or 
tribal group is almost entirely self-sufficient. The group is composed of ;ndividuals who 
are both communal producers and consumers of whatever goods and services can be made 
available. As economies evolve, people begin to specialiLe in some aspect of economic activ- 
ity. They engage in farming, hunting, or fishing, or some other basic craft. Eventually, this 
specialized skill produces excess products, which they exchange or trade for needed goods 
that have been produced by others. This exchange process or barter marks the beginning 
of formal channels of distribution. These early channels involve a series of exchanges between 
two parties who are producers of one product and commmers of the other 

With the growth of specialization, particularly industrial specialization, and with 
improvements in methods of transportation and communication, channels of distribution 
become longer and more complex. Thus, corn grown in Illinois may be processed into corn 
chips in West Texas, which are then distributed throughout the United States. Or, turkeys 
grown in Virginia are sent to New York so that they can be shipped to supermarkets in Vir- 
ginia. Channels don't always make sense. 

The channel mechanism also operates for service products. In the case of medical 
care, the channel mechanism may consist of a local physician, specialists, hospitals, ambu- 
lances, laboratories, insurance companies, physical therapists, home care professionals, and 
so forth. All of these individuals are interdependent, and could not operate successfully with- 
out the cooperation and capabilities of all the others. 

Based on this relationship, we define a marketing channel as"sets of interdependent 
organizations involved in the process of making a product or service available for use or 
consumption, as well as providing a payment mechanism for the provider." 

This definition implies several important characteristics of the channel. First, the chan- 
nel consists of institutions, some under the control of the producer and some outside the 
producer's control. Yet all must be recognized, selected, and integrated into an efficient chan- 
nel arrangement. 

Second, the channel management process is continuous and requires constant mon- 
itoring and reappraisal. The channel operates 24 hours a day and exists in an environment 
where change is the norm. 

Finally, channels should have certain distribution objectives guiding their activities. 
The structure and management of the marketing channel is thus in part a function of a firm's 
distribution objective. It is also a part of the marketing objectives, especially the need to 
make an acceptable profit. Channels usually represent the largest costs in marketing a product. 



FLOWS IN MARKETING CHANNELS 



255 



FLOWS IN MARKETING CHANNELS 



One traditional framework that has been used to express the channel mechanism is the con- 
cept of flow. These flows, touched upon in Figure 10.2, reflect the many linkages that tie 
channel members and other agencies together in the distribution of goods and services. From 
the perspective of the channel manager, there are five important flows. 

1 . Product flow 

2. Negotiation flow 

3. Ownership flow 

4. Information flow 

5. Promotion flow 

These flows are illustrated for Perrier Water in Figure 10.2. 

The product flow refers to the movement of the rjhysical product from the manufac- 
turer through all the parties who take physical possession of the product until it reaches the 
ultimate consumer. The negotiation flow encompasses the institutions that are associated 
with the actual exchange processes. The ownership flow yhows the movement of title through 
the channel, informationflow identifies the individuals who participate in the flow of infor- 
mation either up or down the channel. Finally, the promotion flow refers to the flow of 



Product 
flow 




Negotiation 
flow 




Ownership 
flow 




Information 
flow 




Promotion 
flow 




Manufacturer 


Manufacturer 


Manufacturer 


Manufacturer 


"**! 




Manufacturer 


I 


1 


i 


L 






i 




4 
I 




Transportation 
company 








Transportation 
company 




I 

i 




r 






i 








T 




i 


Advertising 
Agency 




Public 
warehouse 






Public 
warehouse 










i 


■ 






1 








Transportation 
company 




Transportation 
company 




i 


' 




' 


r 




' 


■ 




t 










: 


Bottlers and 
beer distributors 




Bottlers and 
beer distributors 




Bottlers and 
beer distributors 




Bottlers and 
beer distributors 






Bottlers and 
beer distributors 


1 


• 




\ 




' 


i 




t 
1 




U 




i 


- 


Supermarkets 




Supermarkets 




Supermarkets 




Supermarkets 




Supermarkets 




\ 




* 




i 


' 




» 




' 


' 




Consumers 




Consumers 




Consumers 




Consumers 


«*■»► 




Consumers 


-*- 



FIGURE 10-2 Five flows in the marketing channe: for PerrierWater 

Source: Bert Rosenbloom, Marketing Channels: A Management View, Dryden Press, Chicago, 1983, p. 11. 



256 CHAPTER 10 CHANNEL CONCEPTS: DISTRIBUTING THE PRODUCT 



persuasive communication in the form of advertising, personal selling, sales promotion, and 
public relations. 



FUNCTIONS OF THE CHANNEL 



The primary purpose of any channel of distribution is to bridge the gap between the pro- 
ducer of a product and the user of it, whether the parties are located in the same commu- 
nity or in different countries thousands of miles apart. The channel is composed of different 
institutions that facilitate the transaction and the physical exchange. Institutions in chan- 
nels fall into three categories: (1) the producer of the product-a craftsman, manufacturer, 
farmer, or other extractive industry producer; (2) the user of the product- an individual, 
household, business buyer, institution, or government; and (3) certain middlemen ai the whole- 
sale and/or retail level. Not all channel members perform the same function 
Heskett 2 suggests that a channel performs three important functions: 

1. Transactional junctions-buying, selling, and risk assumption. 

2. Logistical junctions-assembly, storage, sorting, and transportation. 

3. Facilitating junctions-post-purchase service and maintenance, financing, infor- 
mation dissemination, and channel coordination or leadership. 

These functions are necessary for the effective flow of product and title to the customer and 
payment back to the producer. Certain characteristics are implied in every channel. First, although 
you can eliminate or substitute channel institutions, the functions that these institutions per- 
form cannot be eliminated. Typically, if a wholesaler or a retailer is removed from the chan- 
nel, the function they perform will be either shifted forward to a retailer or me consumer, or 
shifted backward to a wholesaler or the manufacturer. For example, a producer of custom hunt- 
ing knives might decide to sell through direct mail instead of retail outlets. The producer absorbs 
the sOlting, storage, and risk functions; the post office absorbs the transportation function; and 
the consumer assumes more lisk in not being able to touch or try the product before purchase. 

Second, all channel institutional members are part of many channel transactions at 
any given point in time. As a result, the complexity may be quite overwhelming. Consider 
for the moment how many different products you purchase in a sing:e year, and the vast 
number of channel mechanisms you use. 

Third, the fact that you are able to complete all these transactions to your satisfac- 
tion, as well as to the satisfaction of the other channel members, is due to the routinization 
benefits provided through the channel. Routinization means that the right products are most 
always found in places (catalogues or stores) where the consumer expects to find them, com- 
parisons are possible, prices are marked, and metnods of payment are available. Routinization 
aids the producer as well as the consumer, in that the producer knows what to make, wnen 
to make ;t, and how many units to make. 

Fourth, there are instances when the best channel arrangement is direct, from the pro- 
ducer to the ultimate user. This is particularly true when available middlemen are incom- 
petent, unavailable . or the producer feels he can perform the tasks better. Similarly, it may 
be important for the producer to maintain direct contact with customers so that quick and 
accurate adjustments can be made. Direct-to-user channels are common in industrial set- 
tings, as are door-to-door selling and catalogue sales. Indirect channels are more typical 
and result, for the most part, because producers are not able to perfonn the iasks pmvided 
by middlemen. (See Figure 10.3.) 

Finally, although the notion of a channel of distribution may sound unlikely for a serv- 
ice product, such as health care or air travel, service marketers also face the problem of 



CHANNEL INSTITUTIONS: CAPABILITIES AND LIMITATIONS 257 



Manufacturer 



_L 



Electrical 
distributors 



Hardware 
wholesalers 



Repair and 
service shops 



Auto parts 
warehouse 
distributors 


Aircraft 

parts 

distributors 


1 




Auto parts 
wholesalers 


Airport 

maintenance 

shops 






Garages 


Airlines 
maintenance 
departments 






Service 
stations 


Aircraft 

components 

manufacturers 






Auto 
dealers 








Fleet 
owners 








Marine 

maintenance 

shops 





Electronic 

parts 
distributors 



Neon sign 
supply 
houses 



_!_ 



Welding 
equipment 
distributors 



I 



OEM 



Neon sign 
manufacturers 



Radio, TV, 

and electronic 

equipment 

repair and 

service 



Manufacturers 

of welding 

supplies 



Welders 



Industrials 



FIGURE 10.3 Marketing channels of a manufacturer of electrical wire and cable 
Source: Edwin H. Lewis, Marketing Electrical Apparatus and Supplies, McGraw-Hili, Inc., 1961, p. 215. 



delivering their product in the form, at the place and time their customer demands. Banks 
have responded by developing bank-by-mail, Automatic Teller Machines (ATMs), and other 
distribution systems. The medical community provides emergency medical vehicles, out- 
patient clinics, 24-hour clinics, and home-care providers. As noted in Figure 10A even per- 
forming arts employ distribution channels. In all three cases, the industries are attempting 
to meet the special needs of their target markets while differentiating their product from 
that of their competition. A channel strategy is evident. 



CHANNEL INSTITUTIONS: 
CAPABILITIES AND LIMITATIONS 



There are several different types of parties participating in the marketing channel. Some 
are members, while others are nonmembers . The former perform negotiation functions and 
participate in negotiation and/or ownership while the latter participants do not. 



Producer and Manufacturer 

These firms extract, grow, or make products. A wide array of products is included, gndfirmc 
vary in size from a one-person operation to those that employ several thousand people and 



258 



CHAPTER 10 CHANNEL CONCEPTS: DISTRIBUTING THE PRODUCT 



generate billions in sales. Despite these differences, all are in business to satisfy the needs 
of markets. In order to do this, these firms must be assured that their products are distrib- 
uted to their intended markets. Most producing and manufacturing firms are not in a favor- 
able position to perform all the tasks that would be necessary to distribute their products 
directly to their final user markets. A computer manufacturer may know everything about 
designing the finest personal computer, but know absolutely nothing about leaking sure the 
customer has access to the product. 

In many instances, it is the expertise and availability of other channel institutions that 
make it possible for a producer/manufacturer to even participate in a particular market. Imag- 
ine the leverage that a company like Frito-Lay has with various supermarket chains. Sup- 
pose you developed a super-tasting new snack chip. What are your chances of taking 
shelf-facings away from FKto-Lay? Zero. Thankfully, a specialty catalog retailer is able to 
include your product for a prescribed fee. Likewise, other channel members can be useful 
to the producer in designing the product, packaging it, pricing it, promoting it, and distributing 
it through the most effective channels. It is rare that a manufacturer has the expertise found 
with other channel institutions. 

Retailing 

Retailing involves all activities required to market consumer goods and services to ultimate 
consumers who a"e motivated to buy in order to satisfy individual or family needs in con- 
trast to business, institutional, or industrial use. Thus, when an individual buys a computer 
at Circuit City, groceries at Safeway, or a purse at Ebags.com, a retail sale has been made. 
We typically think of a store when we think of a retail sale. However, retail sales are 
made in ways other than through stores. For example, retail sales are made by door-to-door 



Performing Artists (Business and Tour Managers) 






















Ipers 
Man 


onal II Personal 1 
ager Manager 

4 




1 Booking II Booking 1 
Agency Agency 


1 Booking 1 
Agency 












4 




1 .Arts , 1 „A 
Council Col 


ncil 


Council 












1 




Mass 
Media 


Is pons or 






Isponsor 


Sponsor 1 






1 1 Sponsor 






Sponsor 1 




Sponsor 




\ 


T T T 








V 


i' 




Performing Arts Audiences i 



FIGURE 10.4 The marketing channels for the performing arts 

Source: John R. Nevin, "An Empirical Analysis of ivlarketing Channels for the Performing Arts," in Michael P. 
Mokwa, William M. Dawson, and E. Arthur Prieve (eds.). Marketing the Arts, NewYork: Praeger Publishers, 
1980, p. 204. 



CHANNEL INSTITUTIONS: CAPABILITIES AND LIMITATIONS 250 

salespeople, such as an Avon representative, by mail order through a company such as L.L. 
Bean, by automatic vending machines, and by hotels and motels. Nevertheless, most retail 
sales are still made in brick-and-mortar stores. 

The Structure of Retailing 

Stores vary in size, in the kinds of services that are provided, in the assortwent of mer- 
chandise they carry, and in many other respects. Most stores are small and have weekly 
sales of only a few hundred dollars. A few are extrelT'ely large, having sales of $500,000 
or more on a single day. If fact, on special sale days, some stores have exceeded $i mil- 
lion in sales. 

Department Stores Department stores are characterized by their very wide prod- 
uct mixes. That is, they carry many different types of merchandise that may include hard- 
ware, clothing, and appliances. Each type of merchandise is typically displayed in a different 
section or department within the store. The depth of the product mix depends on the store. 

Chain Stores The 1920s saw the evolution of the chain store movemenL. Because 
chains were so large, they were able to buy a wide variety of merchandise in large quan- 
tity discornts. The discounts substantially lowered their cost compared to costs of single- 
unit retailers. As a result, they could set retail prices that were lower than those of their 
small competitors and thereby iflcrease their share of the market. Furthermore, chains were 
able to attract many customers because of their convenient locations, made possible by the;r 
financial resources and expertise in selecting locations. 

Supermarkets Supermarkets evolved in the MOS and 1930s. For example, Piggly 
Wiggly Food Stores, founded by Clarence Saunders around 1920, introduced self-service 
and customer checkout counters. Supermarkets are large, self-service stores with central 
checkout facilities, they carry an extensive line of food items and often nonfood products. 

Supermarkets were among the first to experiment with such innovations as mass mer- 
chandising and low-cost distribution methods. Their entire approach to the distribution of 
food and household cleaning and maintenance products was to make available to the pub- 
lic large assortments of a variety of such goods at each store at a minimal price. 

Discount Houses Cut-rate retailers have existed for a long time. However, since 
the end of World War II, the growth of discount houses as a legitimate and extremely com- 
petitive retailer has assured this type of outlet a permanent place among retail institutions. 
It essentially followed the growth of the suburbs. 

Discount houses are characterized by an emphasis on price as their main sales appeal. 
Merchandise assortments are generally broad including both hard and soft goods, but assort- 
ments are typically limited to the most popular items, colors, and sizes. Such stores are usu- 
ally large, self-service operations with long hours, free parking, and relatively simple fixtures. 

Warehouse Retailing Warehouse retailing is a relatively new type of retail insti- 
tution that experienced considerable growth ip the 1970s. Catalog showrooms are the largest 
type of warehouse retailer, at least in terms of the number of stores operated. Retail sales 
for catalog showrooms grew from 1 billion dollars in 1970 to over 12 billion today. Their 
growth rate has slowed recently, but is still substantial. 

Franchises Over the years, particularly since the 1930s, large chain store retailers 
have posed a serious competitive threat to small storeowners. One of the responses to this 



260 CHAPTER 10 CHANNEL CONCEPTS: DISTRIBUTING THE PRODUCT 



threat has been the rapid growth of franchising. Franchising is not a new development. The 
major oil companies such as Mobil have long enfranchised its dealers, who only sell the 
products of the franchiser (the oil companies). Automobile manufacturers also enfrancilise 
Lneir dealers, who sell a stipulated make of car (e.g., Chevrolet) and operate their business 
to some extent as the manufacturer wishes. 

Planned Shopping CenterslMaUs After World War II, the United States under- 
went many changes. Among those most influential on retailing were the growth of the pop- 
ulation and of the economy. New highway construction enabled people to leave the congested 
central cities and move to newly developed suburban residential communities . "his move- 
ment to the suburbs established the need for new centers of retailing to serve the explod- 
ing populations. By 1960 there were 4,500 such centers with both chains and nonchains 
vying for locations. 

Such regional chopping centers are successful because they provide customers with 
a wide aSiOrt.neru of products. If you want to buy a suit or a dress, a regional shopping 
center provider, many alternatives in one location. Regional centers are those larger cen- 
ters that typically have one or more department stores as major tenants. Community cen- 
ters are moderately sized with perhaps ajunior department store; while neighborhood centers 
are small, with the key stOfe usually a supermarket. Local clusters are shopping districts 
that have simply grown over time around key intersections, courthouses, and the like. String 
street locations are along major traffic routes, while isolated locations are freestanding sites 
not necessarily in heavy traffic areas. Stores in isolated locations must use promotion or 
some other aspect of their marketing mix to attract shoppers. Still, as indicated in the next 
Newsline, malls are facing serious problems. 



NEWSLINE: THE MALL: A THING OF THE PAST? 

She was born into retail royalty, a double-decker shrine to capitalism 
that seduced cool customers and wild-eyed shopaholics alike to roam 
her exhausting mix of 200 stores Her funky, W-shaped design was 
pure 1960s, as if dreamed up by that era's noted architectural whiz, 
Mike Brady. When her doors opened the first morning, a brass band 
serenaded the arriving mob. 

Cinderella City, once the biggest covered mall on the planet, was a 
very big deal-for about six years, until the next gleaming mall came 
along in 1974. That's when the music stopped at Cinderella City. 
Soon the patrons grew scarce, the concrete began crvmbling and 
graffiti stained some of the walls. It's not pretty, but that's the cold 
law of the consumer jungle. One minute you're luring shoppers from 
miles around to chug an Orange Julius or grab a snack at the Pretzel 
Hut; a few years go by, and they're planting you in the dreaded mall 
graveyard. 

Back then, people made a day out of wandering the massive con- 
courses and lunching in the food courts. Today, with less free Lime 
available for many people, shopping is seen as a necessity. Spending 
time with your family and at home is more important than spending 
time in a store. 

The newest malls reflect the modern need for shopping speed. Cov- 
ered shopping centers now come equipped with dozens of doors to the 
outside instead of two main entrances that usher crowds in and out 



CHANNEL INSTITUTIONS: CAPABILITIES AND LIMITATIONS 261 

through the anchor department store. That same trend paved the way 
for the flurry of freestanding Home Depots and TJ Maxx stores as well 
as discount giants like Wal-Mart. All are sapping customers from mid- 
market malls, already struggling. In addition to the fresh success of 
freestanding discount stores, the Internet is drawing off even more 
customers who seeK to buy books or music online. 

For the mall to survive, they'll have to be something different — a 
high-quality environment for the aelivery of high touch, high experi- 
ence, high margin retail goods and services: a place you go for the 
entertainment shopping experience. 

Sources: Herb Greenberg, "Dead Mall Walking," Fortune, July 8, 2000, p. 304; 
Calmetla Y. Coleman, "Making Malls (Gasp!] Convenient," The Walt Street Jour- 
nal February 8, 2000, pp. B 1, B2; Bill Briggs. "Birth and Death of the Ameri- 
can Mall," The Denver Post, June 4, 2000, pp. Dl ; D4. 



Nonstore Retailing Nonstore retailing describes sales made to ultimate consumers 
outside of a traditional retail store setting . In total, nonstore retailing accounts for a rela- 
tively small percentage of total retail sales, but it is growing and very important with cer- 
tain types of merchandise, such as life insurance, cigarettes, magazines, books, CDs, and 
clothing. 

One type of nonstore retailing used by such companies as Avon, Electrolux, and many 
insurance agencies is in-home selling. Such sales calls may be made to preselected prospects 
or in some cases on a cold call basis. A variation of door-to-door selling is the demonstra- 
tion party. Here one customer acts as a host and invites friends Tupperware has been very 
successful with this approach. 

Vending machines are another type of nonstore retailing. Automated vending uses coin- 
operated, self-service machines to make a wide variety of products and services available 
to shoppers in convenient locations. Cigarettes, soft drinks, hosiery, and banking transac- 
tions are but a few of the items distributed in this way. This method of retailing is an effi- 
cient way to provide continuou:; service. It is particularly useful with convenience goods. 

Mail order is a form of nonstore retailing that relies on product description to sell 
merchandise. The communication with the customer can be by flyer or catalog. Magazines, 
CDs, clothing, and assorted household items are often sold in this fashion . As with vend- 
ing machines, mail order offers convenience but limited service. It is an efficient way to 
cover a very large geographical area when shoppers are not concentrated in one location. 
Many retailers are moving toward the use of newer communications and computer tech- 
nology in catalog shopping 

Online marketing has emerged during the last decade; it requires that both the retailer 
and the consumer have computer and modem. A modem connects the computer to a tele- 
phone line so that the computer user can reach various online information services. There 
are two types of oniine channels: (1) commercial online channels-various companies have 
set up online information and marketing services that can be assessed by those who have 
signed up and paid a monthly fee, and (2) Internet — a global web of some 45,000 com- 
puter networks that is making instantaneous and decentralized global communication pos- 
sible. Users can send e-mail, exchange views, shop for products, and access real-time news. 

Marketers can carryon online marketing in four ways: (1) using e-mail; (2) partici- 
pating in forums, newsgroups, and bulletin boards; (3) placing ads online; and (4) creating 



262 



CHAPTER 10 CHANNEL CONCEPTS: DISTRIBUTING THE PRODUCT 



an electronic storefront. The last two options represent alternative forms of retailing. Today, 
more than 40,000 businesses have established a home page on the Internet, many of which 
serve as electronic storefronts. One can order clothing from Lands' End or 1C. Penney, books 
from B. Dalton orA.mazon.com, or flowers from Lehrer's Flowers to be sent anywhere in 
the world. Essentially, a company can open its own store on the Internet. 

Companies and individuals can place ads on commercial online services in three dif- 
ferent ways. First, the major commercial online services offer an ad section for listing clas- 
sified ads; the ads are listed according to when they arrived, with the latest ones heading 
the list. Second, ads can be placed in certain online newsgroups that are basically set up 
for commercial purposes. Finally, ads can also be put on online billboards; they pop up while 
su)scribers are using the service, even though they did not request an ad. 

Catalog marketing occurs when companies mail one or more product catalogs to 
selected addresses that have a high likelihood of placing an order. Catalogs are sent by huge 
general-merchandise retailers-lC. Penney's, Spiegel- that carry a full line of merchan- 
dise. Specialty department stores such as Neiman-Marcus and Saks Fifth Avenue send catalogs 
to cultivate an upper-middle class market for high-pliced, sometimes exotic merchandise. 



THE DEATH OF RETAILING GREATLY EXAGGERATED 



Recently, the MIT economist Lester Thurow suggested that 
e-commerce could mean the end of 5,000 years of conven- 
tional retailing if online stores can combine price advantages 
with a pleasant virtual shopping experience. Let's face it: the 
growth of malls and megastores have shown that people want 
selection, convenience, and low prices, and that's about it. 
Sure, people say they'd rather shop from the mom-and-pop 
on Main Street. But if the junk chain store out on the high- 
way has those curling irons for a dollar less, guess where peo- 
ple go? 

So a few years into the e:C01runerce revolution, here are 
a few observations and predictions: 

• Online stores need to become easier to use as well as 
completely trustworthy. 

• If people can go online and get exactly what they get 
from retail stores for less money, that is precisely what 
they will do. 

• Some stores will have a kind of invulnerability to online 
competition; i.e., stores that sell last-minute items or spe- 
cialty items that you have to see. 

• Retail stores may improve their chances by becoming 
more multidimensional; i.e., they have to be fun to visit. 

Still, not everything is rosy for e-tailers. Research provides 
the following insights: 

• For net upstarts, the cost per new customer is $82, com- 
pared to $3 I for traditional retailers. 

• E-tailers' customer satisfaction levels were: 41 % for cus- 
tomer service; 5 1 % for easy returns ; 57% for better prod- 



uct infonnation; 66% for product selection; 70% for 
price, and 74% for ease of use. 

• Repeat buyers for e-tailers was 21 % compared to 34% 
for traditional retailers. 

Suggestions to improve the plight of e-tailers include the 
following : 

• Keep it simple. 

• Think like your customer. 

• Engage in creative marketing. 

• Don't blow everything on advertising. 

• Don't undercut prices. 

While all this advice is good, the recent roller coaster ride of 
high-tech stocks and its disappointing results for e-tailers has 
completely changed the future of e-tailing. While e-tailers have 
spent about $2 billion industry-wide on advertising campaigns, 
they often devote far less attention and capital to the quality 
of services their prospective customers receive once they arrive 
on site. E-tailers are learning what brick and mortar retailers 
have known all along, that success is less about building mar- 
ket share than about satisfying and retaining customers who 
can generate substantial profits. 

Sources: Heather Green, "Shake Out E-Tailers ," Business Week, 
May 15, 2000, pp. 103-106; Ellen Neubome, "It's the Service, 
Stupid," Business Week, April 3. 2000. p. E8; Chris Ott; "Will 
Online Shopping Kill Traditional Retail?" The Denver Business 
Journal, Oct. 28. 1999, p. 46A; Steve Caulk, "Online Merchants 
Need More Effective Web Sites," Rocky Mountain News. Thurs- 
day, March 8. 2001 , p. 5B. 



CHANNEL INSTITUTIONS: CAPABILITIES AND LIMITATIONS 263 

Several major corporations have also acquired or developed mail-order divisions via cata- 
logs. Using catalogs, Avor; sells women's apparel, W.R. Grace sells cheese, and General 
Mills sells sport shirts. 

Some companies have designed "customer-order placing machines," i.e., kiosks (in 
contrast to vending machines, which dispense actual products), and placed them in stores, 
airports, and other locations. For example, the Florsneim Shoe Company includes a machine 
in several of its stores in which the customer indicates the type of shoe he wants (e.g., dress, 
sport), and the color and size. Pictures of Florsheim shoes that meet his criteria appear on 
the screen. 

Wholesaling 

Another important channel member in many dishbution systems is the wholesaler. Whole- 
saling includes all activities required to market goods and services to businesses, institu- 
tions, or industrial users who are motivated to buy for resale or to produce and market other 
products and services. When a bank buys a new computer for data processing, a school buys 
audio-visual equipment for classroom use, or a dress shop buys dresses for resale, a whole- 
sale transaction has taken place. 

The vast majority of all goods produced in an advanced economy have wholesaling 
involved in their marketing. This includes manufacturers . who operate sales offices to per- 
form wholesale functions, and retailers, who operate warehouses or otherwise engage in 
wholesale activities. Even the centrally planned socialist economy needs a structure to han- 
dle the movement of goods from the point of production to other product activities or to 
retailers who distribute to ultimate ccnsumers. Note that many establishments thatpelfonn 
wholesale functions also engage in manufactwing or retailing. This makes it very difficult 
to produce accurate measures of the extent of wholesale activity. For purposes of keeping 
statistics, the Bureau of the Census of the United States Department of Commerce defines 
wholesaling in terms of trie percent of business done by establishments who are primary 
wholesalers . It is estimated that only about 60% of all wholesale activity is accounted for 
in this way. 

Today there are approximately 600,000 wholesale establishments in the United States, 
compared to just fewer than 3 million retailers. These 600,000 wholesalers generate a total 
volume of over 1.3 trillion dollars annually; this is approximately 75% greater than the total 
volume of all retailers. Wholesale volume is greater because it includes sales to industrial 
users as well as merchandise sold to retailers for resale. 

Functions of the Wholesaler 

Wholesalers perform a number of l.seful functions within the channel of distributions. These 
may include all or some combination of the following: 

1. Warehousing-the receiving, storage, packaging, and the like necessary to main- 
tain a Stock of goods for the customers they service. 

2. Inventory control and order processing-keeping track of the physical inven- 
tory, managing its composition and level, and processing transactions to insure 
a smooth flow of merchandise from producers to buyers and payment back to 
the producers. 

3. Transportation-arranging the physical movement of merchandise. 

4. Information- supplying information about markets to producers and information 
about products and suppliers to buyers. 

5. Selling-personal contact with buyers to sell products and service. 



264 CHAPTER 10 CHANNEL CONCEPTS: DISTRIBUTINGTHE PRODUCT 



In addition, the wholesaler must perform ail the activities necessary for the operation of 
any other business such as planning, financing, and developing a marketing mix. The five 
functions listed previously emphasize the nature of wholesaling as a link between the pro- 
ducer and the organizational buyer. 

By providing this linkage, wholesalers assist both the producer and the buyer. From 
the buyer's perspective, the wholesaler typically brings together a wide assortment of prod- 
ucts and lessens the need to deal directly with a large number of producers. This makes the 
buying task much more convenient. A hardware store with thousands of items from hun- 
dreds of different producers may find it more efficient to deal with a smaller number of 
wholesalers. The wholesaler may also have an inventory in the local market, thus speed- 
ing delivery and improving se'vice. The wholesaler assists the producer by making prod- 
ucts more accessible to buyers. They provide the producer with wide market coverage 
information about local market trends in an efficient manner. Wholesalers may also help 
with the promotion of a producer's products to a local or regional market via advertising 
or a sales force to call on organizational buyers. 

Types of Wholesalers 

There are many different types of wholesalers. Some arc independent; others are part of a 
vertical marketing system. Some provide a full range of services; others offer very specialized 
services. Different wants and needs on the part of both buyers and producers have led to a 
wide variety of mode: n wholesalers. Table 10. 1 provides a summary of general types. Whole- 
saling activities cannot be eliminated, but they can be assumed by manjfacturers and retail- 
ers. Those merchant wholesalers who have remained viable have done so by providing 
improved service to suppliers and buyers. To do this at low cost, modem technologies must 
be increasingly integrated into the wholesale operation. 

Physical Distribution 

In a society such as ours, the task of physically moving, handling and storing products has 
become the responsibility of marketing. In fact, to an individual firm operating in a high- 
levei economy, these logistical activities are critical. They often represent the only cost- 
saving area open to the firm . Likewise, in markets where product distinctiveness has been 
reduced greatly, the ability to excel in physical distribution activities may provide a true 
competitive advantage. Ultimately, physical distribution activities provide the bridge between 
the production activities and the markets that are spatially and temporally separated. 

Physical distribution management may be defined as the process of strategically man- 
aging the movement and storage of materials, parts, and finished inventory from suppliers, 
between enterprise facilities, and to customers. Physical distribution activities include those 
undertaken to move finished products from the end of the production line to the final con- 
sumer. They also include the movement of raw materials from a source of supply to the 
beginning of the production line, and the movement of parts, etc., to maintain the existing 
product. Finally, it may include a network for moviag the product back to the producer or 
reseller, as in the case of recalls or repair. 

Before discussing physical distribution, it is important to recognize that physical dis- 
tribution and the channel of distribution are not independent decision areas. They must be 
considered together in order to achieve the organization's goal of satisfied customers. Sev- 
eral relationships exist between physical distribution and channels, including the following: 

1. Defining the physical distribution standards that channel members want. 

2. Making sure the proposed physical distribution program designed by an organi- 
zation meets the standards of channel members. 



CHANNEL INSTITUTIONS: CAPABILITIES AND LIMITATIONS 265 

3. Selling channel members on physical distribution programs. 

4. Monitoring the results of the physical distribution program once it has been 
implemented. 

Figure 10.5 illustrates the components of physical distribution management. 



The first name 
in professional 
services. 



Since our founding in 1913 by Arthur Andersen, 

we have believed strongly in the idea of one finn. 

Integrated, 

Around the world. Across diSCipfrnt'5. 

Consulting. Assurance, Tax. Corporate Finance. 
Now, our firm will be known by one name. 
We will be known as. simply. Andersen, 
The first name in professional services. 



A NDERSEN 



www.andersen.com 

CM01 Vi**w tt*tt4*» W *i '^1* I, 



AD 10.1 Andersen appeals to both institutions and individuals. 



266 



CHAPTER 10 CHANNEL CONCEPTS: DISTRIBUTING THE PRODUCT 



TABLE 10.1 Tvpes of Modern Wholesalers 



Typa 



Definition 



Subcategories 



Full-service merchandise 
wholesaler 



Limited-service merchant 
wholesalers 



Take title to the merchandise and assume 
the risk involved in an independent 
operation; buy and resell products; offer a 
complete range of services. 

Take title to the merchandise and assume 
the risk involved in an independent 
operation; buy and resell products; offer a 
limited range of services. 



• General 

• Limited-line 



• Cash and carry 

• Rack jobbers 

• Drop shippers 

• Mail orders 



Agents and brokers 



Manufacturer's sales 



Do not take title to the merchandise; bring 
buyers and sellers together and negotiate 
the terms of the transaction: agents 
merchants represent either the buyer or 
seller, usually on a permanent basis; 
brokers bring parties together on a 
temporary basis, 



Owned directly by the manufacturers; 
performs wholesaling functions for the 
manufacturer, 



Agents 

• Buying agents 

• Selling agents 

• Commission merchants 
••■> Manufacturers' age"lts 
Brokers 

• Real estate 
. Fooc" 

• Other products 



Facilitator 



Perform some specialized functions such 
as finance or warehousing; to facilitate the 
wholesale transactions; may be 
independent or owned by producer or 
buyer. 



• Warehouses 

• Finance companies 
•Transportation companies 
. Trade marts 



■nputs 



Land 

Facilities 

Equipment 

Personnel 

Technology 

Finance 



) 



Management 
Activities 



Planning 
Coordination 



Contrail 



Physical Distribution 
Activities 

Material handling 

Procurement 

Packaging 

Traffic & transportation 

Warehousing/sto rage 

Order processing 

Inventory control 

Parts & service support 

Return goods handling 

Plant &warehouse site selection 



Output 



{ nm, utilit y 

Place utility 
Possession utility 




Products 

Raw materials 
In-process 
Finished 
Replacements 

FIGURE 10.5 The physical distribution management process 



ORGANIZING THE CHANNEL 267 



1 



Producers/manufacturers make or assemble the final prod- 
uct provided to the consumer. 

Retailing involves all activities required to market consumer 
goods and service to ultimate consumers who are moti- 
vated to buy in order to satisfy individual or family needs 
in contrast to business, institutional, or industrial use. The 
various types of retailers include: 

a. Department stores 

b. Chain stores 

c. Supermarkets 

d. Discount houses 

e. Warehouse retailing 

f. Franchises 



g. Planned shopping centers 
h. Nonstore retailing 

Wholesaling includes all activities required to market goods 
and services to businesses, institutions, or industrial users 
who are motivated to buy for resale or to produce and mar- 
ket other products/services. The various types of whole- 
salers include: 

a. Full-service merchandise wholesalers 

b. Limited-service merchant wholesalers 

c. Agents and brokers 

d. Manufacturers' sales representatives 

e. Facilitators 



As you can see in Figure 10.5, successful management of the flow of goods from a 
source of supply (raw materials) to the final customer involves effective planning, imple- 
mentation, and control of many distribution activities. These involve raw material, in-process 
inventories (partially completed products not ready for resale), and finished products. Effec- 
tive physical distribution management results initially in the addition of time, place, and 
possession utility of products; and ultimately, the efficient movement of products to cus- 
tomer and the enhancement of the finn's marketing efforts. 

Physical distribution represents both a cost component and a marketing tool for the 
purpose of stimulating customer demand. The major costs of physical distribution include 
transportation, warehousing, carrying inventory, receiving and shipping, packaging, admin- 
istration, and order processing. The total cost of physical distribution activities represents 
13.6% for reseller companies. Poorly managed physical distribution results in excessively 
high costs, but substantial savings can occur via proper management. 

Physical distribution also represents a valuable marketing tool to stimulate consumer 
demand. Physical distribution improvements that lower prices or provide better service are 
attractive to potential customers. Similarly, if finished products are not supplied at the right 
time or in the right places, firms run the risk of losing customers. 



ORGANIZING THE CHANNEL 



Either through a planned process or through a natural evolution, channels of distribution 
reflect an observable organization structure. Three types are most common: conventional 
channels, vertical marketing systems, and horizontal channel systems. 



Conventional Channels 

The conventional channel of distribution could be described as a group of independent busi- 
nesses, each motivated by profit, and having little concern about any other member of the 
distribution sequence. There are no all-inclusive goals, and in many instances, the assign- 
ment of tasks and the evaluation process are totally informal. Consequently, channel frame- 
works might be working against one another, tasks may go undone, and ineffective channel 



268 CHAPTER 10 CHANNEL CONCEPTS: DISTRIBUTINGTHE PRODUCT 



member relationships may last for years. Despite these deficiencies, this type of channel 
structure remains most common, and there are numerous examples of such networks working. 

Vertical Marketing Systems 

Vertical marketing systems have emerged as a solution to the problems of conventional net- 
works. A vertical marketing system (VMS) comes about when a member of the distribu- 
tion channel (usually the manufacturer) assumes a leadership role and attempts to coordinate 
the efforts of the channel so that mutually beneficial goals can be attained. Three forrrm of 
vertical integration are now common. 

Administered VMS 

The administered VMS is very close to the conventional network, but differs in that it is 
informally guided by goals and programs developed by one or a limited number of firms 
in the existing channel. This framework is the source of the concept of a channel captain, 
in that administrative skills and the power of one individual may be the driving force of 
the channel. Often the dominant brands, as in the case of Xerox or Procter & Gamble, are 
able to manifest this cooperation. 

Through the recognition of a channel leader, the distribution networks function bet- 
ter, sales and profits are higher, product exposure improves, inventory management sys- 
tems are initiated, and the coordination of promotional activities becomes a reality. An 
administered system is not without its problems. Often, this effort is placed on the shoul- 
ders of a single individual. Another drawback is the tendency of polarizing channel mem- 
bers. Businesses either become part of the VMS or remain strongly independent. Eventually 
these independents may find themselves at a tremendous competitive disadvantage, and may 
even be deprived of certain channel benefits. 

Contractual VMS 

There are instances when channel members wish to formalize their relationship by employ- 
ing a contractual agreement, known as a contractual VMS. This provides additional con- 
trol, and either explicitly or implicitly spells out the marketing functions to be performed 
by all the members of the channel. This is the most popular form of vertical marketing 
arrangement. 

Corporate VMS 

When channel members on different levels are owned and operated by one organization, a 
corporate vertical marketing system is said to exist. Such integration can be forward or back- 
ward. A manufacturer who owns the various intelmediaries in its channel network has engaged 
in forward integration. A retailer who takes over the wholesaling and manufacturing tasks 
is backward integrating. This process can entail either the organization's purchasing the insti- 
tutions, or establishing its own facilities. Although partial forward or backward integration 
is most common, total integration is becoming more popular. Manufacturers who have recently 
integrated through to the retail level are Dannon '{ogurt, Blue Bell Tee Cream, and Pep- 
peridge Farms. Sears and Safeway stores are two retailers that have successfully integrated 
backward. American Hospital Supply Cornoration is an example of a wholesaler that has 
integrated both backward and forward. 

Horizontal Channel Systems 

There are instances where two or more companies are unable to acquire the capital, or don't 
have the technical or production know-how, to effectively market their products alone. In 



THE CHANNEL MANAGEMENT PROCESS 269 

such cases, these companies may establish a temporary or quasi-pelmanent relationship in 
order to work with each other, and create the channel mechanism required to reach their 
target markets. This arrangement has been labeled a horizontal channel system. For exam- 
ple, two small manufacturers might combine their shipments to common markets in order 
to gain full carload transportation rates that each could not obtain separately. Another com- 
mon scenario is for a large retailer to buyout several competing small retailers in order to 
gain entry into certain markets or with certain customers. 



THE CHANNEL MANAGEMENT PROCESS 



Evidence suggests that a channel should be managed just like the product, promotion, and 
pricing functions. This channel management process contains five steps. 

Analyze the Consumer 

We begin the process of channel management by answering two questions. First, to whom 
shall we sell this merchandise immediately? Second, who are our ultimate users and buy- 
ers? Depending upon a host of factors, including the type of product, functions performed 
in the channel, and location in the channel, the immediate and ultimate customers may be 
identical or they may be quite separate. In both cases, some fundamental questions would 
apply. There is a need to know what the customer needs, where they buy, when they buy, 
why they buy from certain outlets, and how they buy. 

It is best that we first identify the traits of the ultimate user, since the results of this 
evaluation might determine the other channel institutions we would use to meet these needs. 
For example, the buying characteristics of the purchaser of a high-quality VCR might be 
as follow s : 

1. Purchased only from a well-established, reputable dealer. 

2. Purchased only after considerable shopping to compare prices and merchandise 
characteristics. 

3. Purchaser willing to go to some inconvenience (time and distance) to locate the 
most acceptable brand. 

4. Purchased only after extended conversations involving all interested parties, includ- 
ing dealer, users, and purchasers. 

5. Purchase may be postponed. 

6. Purchased only from a dealer equipped to render prompt and reasonable product 
service. 

These buying specifications illustrate the kinds of requirements that the manufacturer must 
discover. In most cases, purchase specifications are fairly obvious and can be discovered 
without great difficulty. On the other hand, some are difficult to determine. For example, 
certain consumers will not dine at restaurants that serve alcohol; others will patronize only 
supermarkets that exhibit definite ethnic characteristics in their merchandising. Nonethe- 
less , by careful and imaginative research, most of the critical factors that bear on consumer 
buying specifications can be determined. 

Knowing the buying specifications of consumers, the channel planner can decide on 
the type or types of wholesaler and/or retailer through which a product should be sold . This 
requires that a manufacturer contemplating distribution through particular types of retail- 
ers become intimately familiar with the precise location and performance characteristics 
of those he is considering. 



270 CHAPTER 10 CHANNEL CONCEPTS: DISTRIBUTING THE PRODUCT 



In much the same way that buying specifications of ultimate users are determined, 
the manufacturers must also discover buying specifications of resellers. Of particular impor- 
tance is the question, "from whom do my retail outlets prefer to buy?" The answer to this 
question determines the types of wholesalers (if any) that the manufacturer should use. 
Although many retailers prefer to buy directly from the manufacturers, this is not always 
the case. Often, the exchange requirements of manufacturers (e.g., infrequent visits, large 
order requirements, and stringent credit temls) are the opposite of those desired by retail- 
ers. Such retailers would rather buy from locr.l distributors who have lenient credit terms 
and offer a wide assortment of merchandise. 

Establish the Channel Objectives 

The channel plan is derived from channel objectives. They are based on the requirements 
of the purchasers and users, the overall marketing strategy, and the long-run goal;; of the 
corporation. However, in cases when a company is just getting started, or an older com- 
pany is trying to carve out a new market niche, the channel objectives may be the domi- 
nant objectives. For example, a small manufacturer wants to expand outside the local market. 
An immediate obstacle is the limited shelf space available to this manufacturer. The addi- 
tion of a new product to the shelves generally means that space previously assigned to com- 
petitive products must be obtained. Without this exposure, the product is doomed. 

As one would expect, there is wide diversity of form that channel objectives can take. 
The following areas encompass the major categories: 

1. Growlh in sales- by reaching new markets, and/or increasing sales in existing 
markets. 

2. Maintenance or improvement of market share—educate or assist channel com- 
ponents in their efforts to increase the amount of product they handle. 

3. Achieve a pattern of distribution-struCture the channel in order to achieve cer- 
tain time, place, and form utilities. 

4. Create an efficient channel-improve channel performance by modifying various 
flow mechanisms. 



Specify DistributionTasks 

After the distribution objectives are set, it is appropriate to determine the specific distribu- 
tion tasks (functions) to be performed in that channel system. The channel manager must 
be far more specific in describing the tasks, and must define how these tasks will change 
depending upon the situation. An ability to do this requires the channel manager to evalu- 
ate all phases of the distribution network. Tasks must be identified fully, and costs must be 
assigned to these tasks. For example, a manufacturer might delineate the following tasks 
as being necessary in order to profitably reach the target market: 

• Provide delivery within 48 hours after order placement 

• Offer adequate storage space 

• Provide credit to other intermediaries 

• Facilitate a product return network 

• Provide readily available inventory (quantity and type) 

• Provide for absorption of size and grade obsoiescence 



THE CHANNEL MANAGEMENT PROCESS 271 

Evaluate and Select from Channel Alternatives 

Determining the specific channel tasks is a prerequisite for the evaluation and selection 
process. There are four bases for channel alternatives: (1) number of levels, (2) intensity at 
the various levels, (3) types of intermediaries at each level, and (4) application of selection 
criterion to channel alternatives. 3 

Number of Levels 

Channels can range in levels from two to several (five being typical). The two-level chan- 
nel (producer to consumer) is a direct channel and is possible only if the producer or cus- 
tomer are willing to perform several of the tasks performed by intermediaries. The number 
of levels in a particular industry might be the same for all the companies simply because 
of tradition. In other industries, this dimension is more flexible and subject to rapid change. 

Intensity at Each Level 

Once the number of levels has been decided, the channel manager needs to determine the 
actual number of channel components involved at each level. How many retailers in a par- 
ticular market should be included in the distribution network? How many wholesalers? 
Although there are limitless possibilities, the categories shown in Figure 10.6 have been 
used to describe the general alternatives. 

The intensity decision is extremely critical, because it is an important part of the firm's 
overall marketing strategy. Companies such as Coca-Cola and Timex watches have achieved 
high levels of success through their intensive distribution strategy. 

Types of Intermediaries 

As discussed earlier, there are several types of intermediaries that operate in a particular 
channel system. The objective is to gather enough information to have a general understanding 
of the distribution tasks these intermediaries perform. Based on this background informa- 
tion, several alternatives will be eliminated. 



(1) Exclusive distribution (such as Ethan Allen and Drexel Heritage Furniture) 

• The use of a single or very few outlets 

• Creates high dealer loyalty and considerable sales support 

• Provides greater control 

• Limits potential sales volume 

• Success of the product is dependent upon the ability of a single intermediary 

(2) Intensive distribution (such as candy)-the manufacturer attempts to get as many 
intermediaries of a particular type as possible to carry the product 

• Provides for increased sales volume, wider consumer recognition, and considerable 
impulse purchasing 

• Low price, low margin, and small order sizes often result 

• Extremely difficult to stimulate and control this large number of intermediaries 

(3) Selective distribution (such as Baskin-Robbins)-an intermediary strategy, with the exact 
number of outlets in any given market dependent upon market potential, density of 
population, dispersion of sales, and competitors' distribution policies 

• Contains some of the strengths and weaknesses of the other two strategies. 

• It is difficult to determine the optimal number of intermediaries in each market 
FIGURE 10.6 Levels of channel intensity 



272 CHAPTER 10 CHANNEL CONCEPTS: DISTRIBUTING THE PRODUCT 



Having identified several possible alternative channel structures, the channel man- 
ager is now at a place where he or she can evaluate these alternatives with respect to some 
set of criteria. Company factors, environmental trends, reputation of the reseller, experi- 
ence of reseller are just a few examples. 

Who Should Lead 

Regardless of the channel framework selected, channels usually perform better if someone 
is in charge, providing some level of leadership. Essentially, the purpose of this leadership 
is to coordinate the goals and efforts of channel irstitutions. The level of leadership can 
range from very passive to quite active-verging on dictatorial. The style may range from 
very negative, based on fear and punishment, to very positive, based on encouragement and 
reward. In a given situation, any of these leadership styles may prove effective. 

Given the restrictions inherent in channel leadership, the final question is "who should 
lead the channel?" Two important trends are worth noting, since they influence the answer. 
First, if we look at the early years of marketing, i.e., pre-I92G, the role of the wholesaler 
(to bring the producer and consumer together) was most vital. Consequently, during this 
period, the wholesaler led most channels . This is no longer true. A second trend is the appar- 
ent strategy of both manufacturers and retailers to exert power through size. In a type of 
business cold war, manufacturers and retailers are constantly trying to match each other's 
size. The result has been some serious warfare to gain channel superiority. 

Under which conditions shouid the manufacturers lead? The wholesaler? The retailer? 
While the answer is contingent upon many factors, in general, the manufacturer should lead 
if control of the product (merchandising, repair) is critical and if the design and redesign 
of the channel is best done by the manufacturer. The wholesaler should lead where the man- 
ufacturers and retailers have remained small in size, large in number, relatively scattered 
geographically, are financially weak, and lack marketing expertise. The retailer should lead 
when product development and demand stimulation are relatively unimportant and when 
personal attention to the customer is important. 



Evaluating Channel Member Performance 

The need to evaluate the performance level of the channel members is just as important as 
the evaluation of the other marketing functions. Clearly, the marketing mix is quite inter- 
dependent and the failure of one component can cause the failure of the whole . There is 
one important difference, with the exception of the corporate VMS; the channel member 
is dealing with independent business firms, rather than employees and activities under the 
control of the channel member, and their willingness to change is lacking. 

Sales is the most popular performance criteria used in channel evaluation. Sales might 
further be subdivided into current sales compared with historical sales, comparisons of sales 
with other channel members, and comparisons of the channel member's sales with prede- 
termined quotas. Other possible performance criteria are: maintenance of adequate inven- 
tory, selling capabilities, attitudes of channel intermediaries toward the product, competition 
from other intermediaries and from other product line carried by the manufacturers own 
channel members. 

Correcting or Modifying the Channel 

As a result of the evaluation process, or because of other factors such as new competi- 
tion, technology, or market potential, changes will be made in the channel structure. 
Because channel relationships have tended to be long-term, and the channel decision 



THE HUMAN ASPECT OF DISTRIBUTION 273 

has such a pervasive impact on the business, great care should be taken before chang- 
ing the status quo. 

Terminations of channel members not performing at minimum performance standards 
should be employed only as a last resort. Corrective actions are far less destructive and main- 
tain the goodwill that is so crucial in channel relationships. This requires that the channel 
manager attempt to find out why these channel members have performed poorly and then 
implement a strategy to correct these deficiencies. 

Sometimes a producer decides that an entirely new channel needs to be added, or an 
existing one deleted. A manufacturer of camera accessories might decide that he wants to reach 
the skilled amateur market in addition to the professional photographer market. This would 
mean designing a different channel, and learning about a different set of intermediaries. 



THE HUMAN ASPECT OF DISTRIBUTION 



A channel of distribution by its very nature is made up of people. Ideally, a channel mem- 
ber should coordinate his or her efforts with other members in such a way that the performance 
of the total distribution system to which he or she belongs is enhanced. This is rarely the 
case. Part of this lack of cooperation is due to the organization structure of many channels, 
which encourages a channel member to be concerned only with channel members imme- 
diately adjacent to them, from whom they buy and to whom they sell. A second reason is 
the tendency of channel members to exhibit their independence as separate business oper- 
ations. It is difficult to gain cooperation under this arrangement. Four human dimensions 
have been incorporated into the study of channel behavior: roles, communication, conflict, 
and power. It is assumed that an understanding of these behavioral characteristics will increase 
the effectiveness of the channel. 

Role 

Most channel members participate in several channels. Establishing the role of a channel 
member means defining what the behavior of the channel member should be. For exam- 
ple, a basic role prescription of the manufacturer may be to maximize the sales of his/her 
particular brand of product. This connotes that the manufacturer is to actively compete for 
market share, and aggressively promote his or her brand. The role prescriptions of inde- 
pendent wholesalers, however, are likely to be quite different. Since wholesalers may rep- 
resent several competing manufacturers, his or her role would be to build sales with whatever 
brands are most heavily demanded by retailers. Therefore, a major issue in channel man- 
agement relates to defining the role prescriptions of the various participants in order to achieve 
desired results. This is accomplished through a careful appraisal of the tasks to be performed 
by each channel member and clear communication of these roles to the members. 

Communication 

Channel communication is sending and receiving information that is relevant to the oper- 
ation of the channel. It is critical for the success of the channel member to work to create 
and foster an effective flow of information within the channel. Communication will take 
place only if the channel member is aware of the pitfalls that await. The channel manager 
should therefore try to detect any behavioral problems that tend to inhibit the effective flow 
of information through the channel and try to solve these problems before the communi- 
cation process in the channel becomes seriously distorted. 



274 CHAPTER 10 CHANNEL CONCEPTS: DISTRIBUTING THE PRODUCT 



Conflict 



Anytime individuals or organizations must work together and rely on each other for per- 
sonal success, conflict is inevitable. Conflict, unlike friendly competition, is personal and 
direct and often suggests a confrontation. Because it is so pervasive in distribution, a great 
deal of research has been conducted m attempts to identify its causes, outcomes, and solutions. 
There is also a need to manage conflict in the channel. This consists of (1) estab, 
lishing a mechanism for detecting conflict., (2) appraising the effects of the conflict, and 
(3) resolving the conflict. This last consideration is most difficult to implement. Techniques 
such as a channel committee, jomt goal setting, and bringing in an arbitrator have all been 
used. There are even cases when conflict is necessary. Such is the case in the e-market- 
place. For example, Anne Mulcahy, President of Xerox General Markets Operation, notes, 
"Those that don't aggressively embrace multiple channels for multiple products will get 
left behind. The inherent conflict in this business modei is not only a reality of business; 
it's a sign of a healthy company." 

Power 

Power is our willingness to use force in a relationship. It is often the means by which we 
are able to control or influence the behavior of another party. In the channel mechanism, 
power refers to the capacity of a particular channel member to control or influence the behav- 
ior of another channel member. For instance, a large retailer may want the manufacturer to 
modify the design of the product or perhaps be required to carry less inventory. Both par- 
ties may attempt to exert their power in an attempt to influence the other's behavior. T;le 
ability of eithe!" of the parties to achieve this outcome will depend upon the amount of power 
that each can bring to bear. 



1. Three general alternatives exist in organizing the channel: 3. Channels may exhibit several human traits: 
conventional, vertical, and horizontal. a. Role 

2. The steps in channel design include the following: "• 2 ommumcation 

a. Analyze the consumer c - Conflict 

b. Establish channel objectives d. Power 
C. Specify the channel tasks 

d. Select the appropriate channel from available 
alternatives 

e. Evaluate the results 




THE WALL STREETJOURNAL 



IN PRACTICE 

Marketing channels connect pro- 
ducers and consumers by moving 
finished goods that are available 
for consumption. Channel manage- 
ment is a process involving careful 
planning and monitoring. As with 
other marketing functions, market- 
ing channels have objectives that 
guide their activities. 

To successfully manage distri- 
bution channels, marketers must 
analyze end consumers, establish 
channel objectives, specify channel 
tasks, select the appropriate chan- 
nel, and evaluate results of the 
process. If these steps are executed 
successfully, marketers can help 
their organizations save costs. 

Several professional and trade 
associations exist for channel man- 
agers and those involved in the 
process. The American Society of 
Transportation and Logistics 
(www.astl.org) is a professional 
organization founded in 1946 by a 
group of industry leaders to ensure 
a high level of professionalism and 
promote continuing education in 
the field of transportation and 
logistics. 

The National Association of 
Wholesalers-Distributors 
(www.naw.org) comprises over 100 
national line-of-trade associations, 
representing virtually all products 
that move to market via whole- 
saler-distributors. 

The National Retail Federa- 
tion (www.nrf.com) conducts pro- 
grams and services in research, 
education, training, information 
technology, and government affairs 
to protect and advance the interests 
of the retail industry. NRF also 
includes in its membership key sup- 



pliers of goods and services to the 
retail industry. 

Marketing channels can make 
or break Internet companies. Many 
Internet companies attempt to dif- 
ferentiate themselves by providing 
fast delivery of customer orders 
anywhere in the world. To achieve 
this, these companies must success- 
fully manage their marketing chan- 
nels. The Interactive Journal's Tech 
Center is an excellent source for all 
issues related to technology. 

Keep apprised of emerging 
technologies, developments in spe- 
cific companies, and industry trends 
by reading articles in Tech Center 
and Marketplace. 

DELIVERABLE 

Use the Interactive Journal to 
search for articles about one organ- 
ization that successfully manages 
channels and one organization that 
does not. Compare the strategies of 
both companies and discuss what 
works and what does not work for 
each organization. Support your 
conclusions with concepts fTOm the 
chapter. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 

1. Why do organizations need to 
effectively manage their chan- 
nels of distribution? What hap- 
pens when they do not? 

2. How does ineffective channel 
management affect con- 
sumers? An organization's rev- 
enue stream? 

3. What role does technology 
play in channel management? 
What types of technology can 
organizations use to improve 
channel management? 



275 



276 CHAPTER 10 CHANNEL CONCEPTS: DISTRIBUTING THE PRODUCT 

SUMMARY 



The complex mechanism of connecting the producer with the consumer is referred to as the channel of 
distribution. This chapter has looked at the evolution of the channel, as well as theoretical explanations 
for the distribution channel phenomenon. Five "flows" are suggested that reflect the ties of channel mem- 
bers with other agencies in the distribution of goods and services. A channel performs three important 
functions: (I) transactional functions, (2) logistical functions, and (3) facilitating functions. Channel strate- 
gies are evident for service products as well as for physical products. Options available for organizing 
the channel structure include: (1) conventional channels, (2) vertical marketing systems, (3) horizontal 
channel systems, and (4) multiple channel networks. Designing the optimal distribution channel depends 
on the objectives of the firm and the characteristics of available channel options. 

The primary members of distribution channels are manufacturers, Wholesalers, and retailers, 
Retailing is all activities required to market goods and services to the ultimate consumer. This makes 
retailers who perform such activities an important link in the channel of distribution for many con- 
sumer products. 

Wholesaling involves all activities required to market goods and services to businesses, insti- 
tutions, or industrial users who are motivated to buy for resale or to produce and market other prod- 
ucts and services. Wholesalers provide a linkage between producers and retailers; or industrial users. 

Physical distribution management involves the movement and storage of materials, parts, and 
finished inventory from suppliers, between middlemen, and to customers. Hl}*sical distribution activ- 
ities are undertaken to facilitate exchange between marketers and cuslomers, The basic objective of 
physical distribution is to provide an acceptable level of customer service at the lowest possible cost. 
This is done using the total cost concept, which requires that all the costs of each alternative distri- 
bution system be considered when a firm is attempting to provide a level of customer selvice. 

Channels exhibit behavior, as people do, and this behavior neecL to be coordinated and man- 
aged in order to reach desired objectives. The four dimensions of behavior examined are role, com- 
munication, conflict, and power. Strategies for effective channel management include: (I) analyze 
the consumer, (2) establish channel objectives, (3) specify the channel tasks, (4) select the appropri- 
ate channel from available alternatives, and (5) evaluate the results. The chapter concludes with a dis- 
cussion of the legal factor'c impact on channels. 



MARKETERS VOCABULARY 



Exchange function Sales of the product to the various members of the channel of distribution. 

Physical distribution function Moves the product through the exchange channel, along with 
title and ownership. 

Marketing channel Sets of independent organizations involved in the process of making a prod- 
uct or service available for use or consumption as well as providing a payment mechanism for the 
provider. 

Routinization The right products are most always found in places where the consumer expects 
to find them, comparisons are possible, prices are marked, and methods of payment are available. 

Retailing Involves all activities required to market consumer goods and services to ultimate 
consumers. 

Nonstore retailing Sales made to ultimate consumers outside a traditional retail store selting. 

Wholesaling Includes all activities required to market goods and services to businesses, instuu- 
tions, or industrial users. 

Conventional channel A group of independent businesses, each motivated by profit, and having 
little concern about any other member of the distl'ibution sequence. 



CASE APPLICATION 277 

Vertical marketing system Come:, about when a member of the distribution channel assumes a 
leadership role and attempts to coordinate the efforts of the channel. 

Channel role Defines what the behavior of the channel member should be. 

Channel conflict Personal and direct friction; often suggests a potential confrontation. 

Channel power A willingness to use force in a relationship. 



DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 



1. Discuss the difference between the theories of the sorting concept and the postponement concept. 

2. What are the five important "flows' that link channel members and other agencies together in 
distribution? Explain each type. 

3. Define the following three channel functions: (1) transactional, (2) logistical, and (3) facilitat- 
ing. What would happen to these functions if the middlemen were eliminated from the chain- 
linking manufacturer to consumer" 

4. Why are channels of distribution important for service products? 

5. Compare the characteristics of the three forms of vertical marketing systems: administered, con- 
tractual, and corporate. 

6. What are the advantages to wholesalers of contractual arrangements forming cooperatives with 
retailers? What are the advantages to retailers" 

7. What is an ancillary structure? What is its function in the distribution channel? 

8. How do economic condjtions of inflation, recession, and shortages impact upon the channel envi- 
ronment? 

9. Discuss situations in which channel conflict may be desirable. How should conflict that produces 
negative effects be managed? 



PROJECT 



Starting with a well-known manufacturer, trace the various channel intermediaries employed. Draw 
a channel diagram. 



CASE APPLICATION 



CONNECTING CHANNEL MEMBERS 

Brokels are in the midst of an identity crisis. Today's broken represent more than 3 000 manufac- 
turers, comprising nearly 60% of all commodity volume in package goods alJ.d 80% of U.S. grocery 
warehouse withurawals. Many brokers rank among the top 10 vendors of their major retail customers. 
Much to their continuing frustration, huwever, many manufacturers are experimenting with some com- 
bination of broker and direct resources in an attempt to deal with the new marketplace. Some of these 
models are working, but managers are not. 

"While each manufacturer must develop a host of different strategies to match thai of indi- 
vidual customers, the broker has the luxury to organize his total strategy around his individual cus- 
tomers," says National Food Brokers Association (r'FBA) president and CEO Robert Schwarze. Brokers 
have always been regarded for their local market expertise, but the rapid shift to micromarketing is 



278 CHAPTER 10 CHANNEL CONCEPTS: DISTRIBUTING THE PRODUCT 

now regarded as their opportunity to ultimately weave themselves into the very fabric of their prin- 
ciples' go-to-market approach. 

Consumers have a lot of shopping alternatives and are taking advantage of them, which is driv- 
ing manufacturers and retailers to look for consumer information to give them a competitive edge. 
In just a few years, as brokers have accelerated their use of data, the number of brokers having online 
access to syndicated data has expanded to more than 200, according to an Andersen Consulting Survey. 

Traditionally, panel and retail census data have been used by manufacturers to understand the 
components of volume and to determine what they can do to grow volume, including the primary 
variables of penetration and buying rates. Now these same consumer dynamics can be used to under- 
stand retail-shopping behavior. Instead of simply measuring how many households buy a particular 
brand, the data measure how many shoppers who buy the brand shop at a particular retailer or retail 
channel. Depending on where the manufacturer fits on the scale will affect how one thinks about mar- 
keting and promotion. 

"In the final analysis, understanding a retailer's position in the market is the key," said A.C. 
Nielsen consumer information and national sales VP Tod Hale. The knowledge about the competi- 
tive frame, including individual retailer shopper demographics, purchase behavior in a category, and 
measures of loyalty by account, are increasingly essential to promotional planning and evaluation. 
The ability to compare and contrast behavior in different accounts is essential to uncovering the 
opportunities. 

Questions: 

1. Do you see sources of conflict in this new arrangement? 

2. How will role determination be determined? 

REFERENCES 

1. Wroe Alderson, "Factors Governing the Development of Marketing 4. Louis W. Stem, and Ronald H. Gorman, "Conflict in Distribution 
Channels," in R.M. Clewett (ed.l, Marketing Channels for Manufac- Channels: An Exploration," in Distribution Channels: Behavioral 
tared Products, Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin. 1954, pp. 5-22. Dimensions, ed. Louis W. Stem, New York: Houghton-Mifflin Co., 

2. James L. Heskett, Marketing, New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1969, p. 156, 



Inc., 1976, pp. 265-267. 

Roger M. Pegram, "Selecting and Evaluating Distributors," New York: 

The Conference Board, Business Policy Study No. 116, 1965, p. 24. 



PHOTO CREDITS 



Chapter 1 

Page 2: ©Elvis Presley Enterprises, Inc. Reproduced with permission. Page 5: ©L.L.Bean, 
Inc. L.L. Bean® is a registered trademark of L.L. Bean, Inc. Page 13: Courtesy Pharma- 
ceutical Research and Manufacturers of America. Page 14: Courtesy Ball Park Franks. Page 
16: From Sprint Business Homepage, www.sprintbiz.com. Courtesy Sprint. Reproduced 
with permission. 

Chapter 2 

Page 31: Courtesy Olympus America, Inc. Page 32: ©200i Partnership for a Drug-Free 
America®. Page 37: Courtesy JBL, Inc. 

Chapter 4 

Page 83: Courtesy DISH NETWORK. ©2001 EchoStar Corporation. All rights reserved. 
Page 92: Courtesy UPS . 

Chapter 7 

Page 157: From the Stuart Weitzman ad campaign, "A Little Obsessed with Shoes," by Korey 
Kay and Partners. Reproduced with permission. Page 172: Courtesy ©2001 America's 
Dairy Farmers and Milk Processors. 

Chapter 8 

Page 205: Courtesy Days Inns Worldwide, Inc. Page 206: Courtesy Howe Marketing Group 
and Eckerd Corporation. Page 207: Courtesy StartSarnpling, Inc. Page 208: Courtesy 
FreeSamples.com. Page 210: ©2001 United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. Page 
212: BUILD A HOME AMERICATM is a trademark of KF Holdings. Reproduced with 
permission. 

Chapter 9 

Page 233: Courtesy Days Inns Worldwide, Inc. Page 238: Courtesy Palm, Inc. Page 241: 
©2001 GM Corp.lCampbell-Ewald. Page 251: Courtesy Aaron Office Furniture. 

Chapter 10 

Page 265: Reprinted courtesy Aurthur Andersen LLP. ©2001 Andersen. All rights reserved. 
Reproduced with permission. 



279 



INDEX 



Acquisition of new product, 172 
Advertising, 193 

appeals, types of, 200 

banner advertisements, 202-204 

business perspective, 222 

consumer's perspective, 222 

creative strategy, development of, 
200 

creative tactics, 200 

defined, 190 

media plan, development of, 
201-202 

organization of, 199-200 

research, 56 

societal perspective, 222 
Advertising agency, 199-200 
Advertising campaign, J98, 222 
Advertising department, 199-200 
Aesthetics, 141 
AIO (activities, interests, opinions) 

inventories, 40 
Allen, Ronald W. , 99 
Alliances, corporate, 133 
Allowances, price, 239-240 
American Airlines, 99 
American Express, 185- 186 
American Import Corporation, 

224-225 
American Log Home, 44 
American Marketing Association, 4, 

204 
Armantrout, Linda 6 
Attitude 

buyer behavior influenced by, 
90-91 

defined, 49, 90, 98 
Augmented product, 153 

B 

Baby boomers, 73, 74, 117 

Baby boomlet, 118. See also Youth 

market 
BankOne Leasing Corporation, 6 
Banner advertisements, 202-204 
Bargaining strength, 29 
Barders to market entry, 105 
BBDO,53 



3eliefs, 85, 118 
Bethune, Gordon M., 100 
Beverage industry, 51,124-125,133 
BlackPlanet.com, 39 
Blackwell, Roger, 95 
Brands/branding, 49,84, 163-164, 

167, 183 
Break-even price, 243-244, 248 
Brokers, manufacturers, 278-279. See 

also Distribution channels 
Budget, marketing, 21,196,202 
Budweiser corporation, 133 
Business cycle, 112-113, 123 
Business norms (international market- 
ing), 141 
Business services, 156 
Business-to-business markets. See 

Organizational markets 
Buyer 

communication needs and wants 
of (See Integrated Marketing 
Communication (IMC)/market- 
ing communication) 
defined. 75 

feedback, mechanism for, 188 
motives of (See Motives, buyer) 
new product ideas generated by, 

175 
pllce, view of, 227-228 
Buyer behavior, 73-100 

case application, 99-100 
decision-making process, 76-81 
factors influencing, 82-91 
market exchange and, 74-75 
organizational, 91-96 
postpurchase, 81 
as problem solving, 75-91 
Wall Street Journal (wsj.com), 97 
Buyer's market, 29 
Buying power, 45, 106, 111-112, 117, 

123 
Buying task, 82-84 

C 

Campaigns, advertising/communica- 
tion, 198-199,222,223 
Campbell's Soup, 33 
Case Corporation, 72 



Cash discounts, 239, 248 
Catalog marketing. See Direct market- 
ing 
Category appraisal, 175-176 
Channels of distribution. See Distribu- 
tion channels 
Chouinard, Yoon, 80 
Chrysler Corporation, 34 
Coca-Cola Company, 9, 34, 162 
Cognitive dissonance, 81, 98 
Colors (international marketing factor), 

139 
Combination export manager, 13 J, 148 
Combination offers, 209, 223 
Combination pricing, 241 
Commercialization of new product, 

180 
Common buying factors (market seg- 
ment), 44 
Communication, 9-10 
adaptation, 136, 149 
basic elements of, 191-192 
channel, 273 
global marketing and, 128, 136, 

149 
group communications through 

opinion leaders, 86 
to mass markets (See Integrated 
Marketing Communication 
(IMC)/marketing communica- 
tion) 
pricing and, 231 
types of systems, 193 
Community contact, 11-12 
Comparison messaging, 9 
Competition, 104-106 
identification of, 10 
international marketing, 145-146 
marketing communication and, 

190-191 
new product ideas from competi- 
tors, 174 
nonprice, 232-235, 248 
Competitive advantage, 3, 24 
Competitive analysis, 104-106 
Competitive distinctiveness, 161 
Competitive intelligence, 10, 11 
Competitive pricing, 234-235, 245 



281 



282 



INDEX 



Competitive situation, 29 
Concentration strategy, 35, 49 
Consumer, 8. See also Buyer 

advertising, perspective on, 222 

behavior (See Buyer behavior) 

buying power (See Buying power) 

credit/financing, availability of, 
164 

defined, 24, 75 

future trends, 95-96 

markets, 30 

new products, viewpoint on, 170 

protection, 108 

sampling, 209, 223 

spending patterns, 111-112 
Consumer goods 

classification of, 155-156 

defined, 182 

marketing, 17 
Consumer-oriented organization, 8 
Contests, 209, 223 
Continental Airlines, Inc., 100 
Convenience goods, 155 
Conventional channels, 267-268, 276 
Core product, 153 
Costs, as pricing factor, 227, 230-231 

break-even analysis, 243-244 

cost-plus pricing and mark-ups, 
242-243 

target rates of return, 244 

value-based pricing, 245 
Cowing, Roy, 249-250 
Crandall, Robert J., 99 
Creative strategy, 200, 222 
Creative tactics, 200, 222 
Credit, consumer, 164 
Cross-functional contact, 10-11 
Culture 

buyer behavior and, 85 

detined, 85, 98, 118 

international markets , effect on, 
139-141 

marketing plan, effect on, 
118-121 
Customary prices, 240 
Customer. See Buyer 
Customs. See Culture 
Cyber Dialogue Data, 78 

D 

Data, market research 

data collection methods, 61-66 

data-mining, 68 

determining types needed, 60 

locating sources of, 60-61 



processing, 66-71, 67 
Dealer loaders, 209, 223 
DeBeers Limited, 85 
Decision-making process, 76-81, 

83-84,98 
Dell Computer Corporation, 126-127 
Delta Air Lines, Inc., 99 
Demand, product 

demand curve, 229, 248 

effective, 45, 50 

primary, 229 
Demographics 

buyer behavior influenced by, 
84-85 

defined, 115 

marketing plan, effect on, 
115-118,121 

market segmentation by, 36-38, 
49, 117-118 
Depression, 112-1 13, 123 
Deregulation, 107-108 
Developing nations, 145 
Developmental selling, 214-215 
Direct exporting, 131. 148 
Direct investment in foreign nations, 

132 
Direct marketing, 16-17,261-263. See 
also Internet 

examples, 4-5, 224-225 

sales force, effect on, 219-220 
Discounts, price, 237-239, 248 
Distribution channels, 20, 138-139 See 
also Physical distribution 
function 

case application, 277-278 

communication, 273 

conflict, management of, 274, 277 

consumer, analysis of, 269-270 

conventional, 267-268 

direct-to-user, 256 

distribution tasks, specification of, 
270 

dual functions of, 253-254 

evolution of, 254 

flows in, 255-256 

functions of, 256-257 

horizontal, 268-269 

human aspect of distribution, 
273-274 

institutional members, 254, 256 

management process, 269-273 

member performance, evaluation 
of,272-273 

objectives, establishment of, 270 

organization of, 267-269 



physical distribution. 264-267 
power of members, 274, 277 
producer and manufacturer, 

257-258 
retailing, 258-263 
role of channel member, 273, 277 
selection of, 271-272 
for service marketing, 256-257 
Wall Street Journal (wsj.com), 

275 
wholesaling, 263-264 

Dolan, Robert, 232 

Domestic marketing, 128 

Doyle Dane Bernbach, 183 

Dr. Pepper, 33 

Dumping, 138, 143, 148 



easyGroup, 142 
Economic accessibility, 45, 50 
Economic entity, market as, 29 
Economic issues, effect on marketing 

of, 110-113, 142-145 
Education and learning 

buyer behavior influenced by, 38, 
87-88, 116 

defined, 98 
Elderly market, 37 
Elvis Presley Enterprises, 1-2 
End-use market segmentation, 41, 43 
Environment, external. See External 

environment 
Environmental scanning, 102 
Ethical issues, 106-110 
Ethnography, 62 
European Union (EU), 143-144 
Evaluation, marketing program, 21, 

196-197 
Excess capacity, use of, 159 
Exchange function (distribution chan- 
nels), 253 , 276 
Exchange process, 8, 74-75 
Exchange rate, 148 
Experimental research approach, 

59-60, 70 
Export marketing, 128, 131, 148 
Expropriation, 144, 148 
External analysis, 102-104, 123, 135 
Extern al environment, 101-125 

case application, 124-125 

competitors, 104-106 

defined, 123 

economic/political issues, 
110- 113, 142-144, 145 

future trends, 120-121 



INDEX 283 



international markets, 139-146 
legal/ethical factors, 106-110, 

J42-144 
social trends, 115-120, 139-141 
surprises, 104 
technology, 113-115, 144 
Wall Street Journal (wsj.com), 
122 
External publics, 209, 223 



Family, buyer behavior influenced by, 

87 
Family Iifecycle, 37-38, 87, 98,121 
Federal Trade Commission, 223 
Financing, consumer. lt)4 
Follow-up, sales, 218 
Ford Motor Co., 246 
For-profit marketing, 15 
Franchising, 132, 259-260 
Full-line product line strategy. 166 
Fulton, B. Keith, 39 



Gender, markets based on, 37 
General Motors, 101-102, 104-105 
Generation X, 118 
Geographic market segments, 36, 44, 

117 
Geographic mobility, 38 
Globallinternational marketing, 17, 
126- 150. See also Export 
marketing 
case application, 149-150 
defined, 127-128, 148 
distribution and logistics, 138-139 
dumping, 138 
environment, 139-146 
expropriation. 144 
goals, setting, 146 
gray market (parallel importing), 

138 
new product idea generation, 175 
personal sales, effect on, 220 
plan, 133-139 
pricing, 137-138, 230 
reasons for/against, 129- 130, 135 
stages in, 130-133 
standardization and customization 

in. 128-129, 136-137 
wiffs, 144 
trading blocs and agreements. 

143-144 
Wall Street Journal (wsj.com), 
147 



Goods marketing, 13-15, 157-159 
Gray market (parallel importing), 138 
Gross margin pricing, 242 
Group. See Consumer 
Guarantees, product, 164-165 

H 

Habits, buying, 84 

Haij-Joannu, Stelios. 142 

Harley- Davidson, 25-26 

Heineken, 133 

Hershey Foods Corp.. 183-184 

Hertz Corporation, 232 

High Frequency Marketing (HPM). 46 

High-involvement decisions, 83-84, 98 

Historical (case study) research 

approach, 60 
Historical research approach, 71 
H.J. Heinz Co.. 136 
Honda ;'I10tol' Co- 17 

I 

Image, effect of pricing on, 231 

Income, markets based on. 38 

Indirect exporting, 131. 148 

Indirect selling, 215 

Industrial markets. See Organizational 

markets 
Influences, buyer behavior, 82-91 
external influences. 85-87 
internal influences. 87-91 
situational influences, 82-85 
Informal assessment marketing envi- 
ronment, 58-59, 70 
Information flow 255 
Information search/processing, buyer, 

77-79,98 
Inside selling, 214, 215 
Institutional markets, 30 
Integrated marketing. See also Inte- 
grated Marketing Communication 
(IMC)/marketing communication 
defined, 11 

global marketing, 135-139 
Internet marketing, 78, 114, 179 
pricing, 232 

spying on competitors, 11 
Integrated Marketing Communication 
(IMC)/marketing communication. 
20,185-225. See also Advertising; 
Personal selling; Public relations; 
Sales promotion 
budget, 196 
campaign, 198-199 
components of, 190 



customer feedback, mechanism 

for, 188 
defined, 189- 190,223 
design of, 194-199 
evaluation of, J96-197 
mix, 197-198,223 
objectives, 190-191 
organization for, 197 
planning for, 188 
role of, 187-189 
target audience for, 188-189 
Wall Street Journal (wsj.com), 
221 
Internal marketing, 9, 24 
Internal publics, 209 223 
International marketing. See 

Global/international marketing 
internet, 10, 16-17,27,115 

African-American community, use 

by, 39 
banner advertisements. 202-204 
Europe, use in, 142 
free services/persona! computers, 

promotion of, 235-236 
market research surveys/question- 
naires, 65 
new products, development of, 

179 
non-users, facts on, 114 
retailing (e-tailers), 261-262 
youth market, use by, 78 
Interviews, 63-64. See also Question- 
naires 

J 

Japan, 145, 151-152 

Jell-O, 34, 88, 167 

Joint ventures. 132, 149, 173 

K 

Kraft Foods 34, 153 



Labau's USA, 51 

Language differences (international 

marketing factor), 139 
Learning. See Education and learning 
Legal issues, 106-110, 142-144, 17 1 
Less developed nations, 145 
Levi Strauss & Co., 169 
Levitt, Theodore, 3, 10, 128-129 
Licensing, 13 1-132, 149, 173 
Lifestyle (marketing factor), 40-41, 50, 

90-91,98, 120 
Limited-line product line strategy, 166 



284 



INDEX 



Line extensions product lines strate- 
gies, 166-167 

Line-filling product line strategies, 167 

Line-pruning product line strategies, 
167 

L.L. riean, 4-5 

Local marketing, 17 

Logistics (of distribution), 138-139 

Low-involvement decisions, 84, 98 

Loyalty, brand, 49, 84 

M 

Macromarketing, 12-13 

Mail order. See Direct marketing 

Manufactured products, 156,257-258 

Manufacturer representatives, 215 

Manufacturer's export agent (MEA), 

131,148 
Market. See also Target audience/ 
market 
approaches to, 31-52,161-162 
barriers to entry, 105 
defincd,28-29,75,98 
as economic entity, 29 
exchange (See Exchange process) 
extension, 162 
future of, 47 
offerings, 84 
research on, 55 
types of, 30 

undifferentiated (market aggrega- 
tion), 32-33, 49 
Marketing, 22 

budget, 21 , 196, 202 
categories of, 12- 17 
channelf. (See Distribution 

channels) 
concept, 8, 24 

control (evaluation), 21, 196-197 
defined, 3-6, 24 
institutions, 18 

justification for study of, 6-7 
keys to success of, 22 
management, 17-22 
mix, 19-21 (See also Distribution 
channels; Integrated Marketing 
Communication (lMC)/market- 
ing communication; Price; 
Product) 
strategic components of, 17-22 
Marketing communication (MC). See 
Integrated Marketing Communica- 
tion (IMC)/marketing communi- 
cation 



Marketing Continuum, The, 51 
Marketing organization 

capabilities of, 9 

characteristics of, 7-12 

consumer content of, 8 

cross-functional contact, 10-11 

functional-level considerations, 18 
Marketing plan, 18-19,54. See also 
Product planning and strategy for- 
mulation 

external factors (See External 
environment) 

internal focus, 102 

international marketing plan, 
133-139 

media plan, development of, 
201-202 

new products, 178 
Marketing research, 53-72. See also 
Data, market research 

areas of research, 55-57 

case application, 72 

conducting research, 67 

cost of, 68 

defined, 70 

design for (See Research design) 

nature and importance of, 54-55 

preliminary investigation, 57-59 

supplier. 123 

value of, 67-68 

Wall Street Journal (wsj.com), 69 
Marketing Science Institute, 56 
Marketplace, 29 
Market segmentation, 34-46, 49, 162 

bases of, 35-36 

competitive pricing and, 234-235 

demographic segments, 36-38 

geographic segments, 36 

identification, clarity of, 44 

new market segments, appeal to, 
159-160 

organizational markets, 41^14 

psychological segments, 39-41 

qualifying customers in segments, 
44-45 

single-base and multi-base seg- 
mentation, 44 

strategies, 35 , 45 — 47 

usage segments, 38-39 

Wall Street Journal (wsj .com), 48 
Market share, 159,230,231 
Mark-ups (pricing), 242-243, 248 
Martineau, Philip, 169 
Maslow, A. H., 89 



Mass marketing, 15-16, 193. See also 
Integrated Marketing Communica- 
tion (IMC)/marketing communi 
cation 

McDonald's, 226-227 

MCI Communications, 68 

McKenna, Regis, 212 

Media 

evaluating, 202, 203 

plan, development of, 201-202 

public relations contact with, 10 

Mergers, acquisition of new products 
through, 172 

Meserue, Wayne, 232 

Micromarketing, 12-13 

Middle class, spending power of, 117 

Miller Brewing Co., 133 

Mission statements, 4, 6, 18-19 

Modeling of behavior, 88 

Monopoly, 29 

Motives, buyer, 40, 50,60, 88-89,98 

Mullen, David, 51 

Multi-base segmentation strategy, 44, 
50 

Multinational marketing, 128, 148. See 
also GlobaVintemational marketing 

Multiple sales, sales person engaged in, 
215 

Multisegment strategy, 35, 49 

N 

National Cattleman's Beef Association 

(NCBA),62 
National marketing, 17 
National origin, markets based on, 38 
Needs, 8 

actuaVpotential, 28, 44^5, 50 
defined, 75-76, 98 
identification, 76-77 
organizational buying, need recog- 
nition and description for, 
93-94 
selling and, 213 
Negotiation flow, 255 
Neiman Marcus, 224 
New products, pricing of, 230, 

235-236 
New products, strategies for develop- 
ing, 168-180 
acquisition of new products, 

171-173 
business analysis, 176-177 
category appraisal, 175-176 
commercialization, 180 



INDEX 285 



consumer's viewpoint, 170 
defining "newness," 169-171 
Federal Trade Commission regula- 
tion, 171 
generation of new product ideas, 

173-175 
Internet market, 179 
manufacturer's viewpoint, 171 
manufactming planning, 178 
marketing planning, 178 
process of new product develop- 
ment, steps in, 173-180 
screening ideas, 175-176 
technical and marketing develop- 
ment,^ 
test marketing, 178-180 
Nintendo, 104-105 
Nissan Motor Co., 152 
Nonmarketing institutions, 18 
Nonprice competition, 232-235, 248 
Nonprofit marketing, 15 
Nonstore retailing, 261-263, 276 
Norms, 86 

North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA), 143 

O 

Observational data collection, 61-63 

Odd prices, 240-241 

Oligopoly, 29 

Online. See Internet 

Opinion leaders, 86, 94 

Organic, expand-o product of, 
202-203 

Organizational markets, 17, 30. 50 
buying behavior, 91-96 
customer types, 41, 49, 75 
product types, 41, 156. 182 
segmentation of, 41—44 

Outside selling, 215 

Ownership flow, 255 



Packaging, 162-163, 183 
Pantry (cabinet) audit, 62 
Parallel impOlting, 138 
Patagonia company, 80 
Patents, 173 
Patronage motives, 88 
Penetration pricing, 235-236, 248 
Pepsi Corporation, 9, 34, 86 
Personal allowances, 239-240 
Personality traits, marketing based on, 
40,49, 89-90,98 



Personal selling, 211-220 

campaign, role in, 198-199 

defined, 190 

follow-up, 218 

future trends, 219-220 

process for, 215-218 

strengths and weaknesses of, 
218-219 

technological aids for, 219-220 

types of, 213-215 
Pet.com, 179 

Pew Internet and American Life Pro- 
ject. 114 
Philips Petroleum, 22 
Phillip Morris, 39-40 
Physical distribution function, 20, 253, 

264-267,276 
Piggyback exporting, 131, 148 
Political issues, effect on marketing of, 

110-113, 142-144 
Population density. 36 
Pop-up surveys, 65 
PortiCo Research, 62 
Positioning, 47, 165-166 

defined, 183 
Positive response, 45 
Premium offers, 209, 223 
Presley. Priscilla, 1-2 
Prestige pricing, 240 
Price, 20, 226-251 

alternative approaches to, 
242-246 

break-even analysis, 243-244 

bundling, 240, 248 

case application, 249-250 

combination pricing, 241 

competitive pricing, 234-235 

cost-oriented (cost-pius/mark- 
ups), 242-243, 248 

customary. 240 

customer's view of, 227-228 

deals, 209, 222 

demand curve, 229, 248 

demand-oriented, 244 

developing pricing strategy, 
231-235 

discounts and allowances, 
237-240, 248 

flexibility, 237-240 

future of, 246 

global markets, 137-138.230 

irrational man pricing, 230 

lines/points, 237, 248 

marketer's view of, 230 



new products, 230, 235-236 

nonprice competition, 232-235, 
248 

objectives, 230-231 

odd, 240-241 

penetration pricing, 235-236, 248 

prestige pricing, 240 

psychological aspects of, 240-241 

rational man pricing, 229-230 

skimming, 235-236, 248 

societal perspective on, 228-229 

target rates of return, 244 

value-based pricing, 244-246, 248 

Wall Street Journal (wsj.com), 
247 

wars, 235, 248 
Priceline.com, 239 
Primary demand, 229 
Primary information, 60-61, 71 
Private branding, 167 
Probability /nonprobability samples, 66 
Procter & Gamble, 219 
Product(s) . 20. See also Demand, 
product 

adaptation, 136-137, 149 

classification of, 154-159 

defined, 152-154, 182 

deletion, 168 

delivery, installation, training, and 
service, 165 

differentiation, 33-34, 49, 
161-162 

features, 162 

flow, 255 

goods vs. services, 157-159 

industrial product types, 41,156, 
182 

levels of, 153-154 

lifecycle, 160-161, 183 

modification, 165 

new (See New products, strategies 
for developing) 

positioning (See Positioning) 

pricing (See Price) 

proliferation, 167 

research on, 56 

specification, 94 

spending patterns, 111-112 

strategy (See Product planning 
and strategy formulation) 

value-added elements, 228 

warranties/guarantees, 164-165 
Production orientation, 8 
Product liability, 107 



286 INDEX 



Product line decisions, 166-168 

Product-line simplification, 168 

Product mix strategies, 165-166 

Product planning and strategy formula- 
tion, 159-184 
approaches to market, 161-162 
branding, 163-164 
case application, 183-184 
development of new products (See 
New products, strategies fOl 
developing) 
objectives, determining, 159-160 
packaging, 162-163 
product deletion, 168 
product features, 162 
prollucllifecycle, 160-161 
product line decisions, 166-168 
product mix strategies, 165-166 
supporting services, 164-165 
Wall Street Journal (wsj.com), 
181 

Profits 

pricing and, 231 
research on, 55 

Projective techniques, 65-66 

Promised product, 154 

Promotion, sales. See Sales promolion 

Promotion flow, 255-256 

Prospecting, for sales, 216 

Prosperity, 112, 123 

Psychological market segments, 39-41, 
49 

Public relations, 10, 193, 199 
defined, 190. 208, 223 
publics of, 209-211 
techniques, 211 

Purchase occasion, 38-39,49 

Pure competition, 29 

Push money, 209, 223 



Quantity discounts, 237-239, 248 
Questionnaires, 60, 63-65, 71, 80, 164, 
176 



Race, as marketing factor, 38, 39, 85, 

116-117. 121 
Readiness stage of, 49 
Rebates, 209, 223 
Rebuys (organizational buying), 93 
Recession, 112. 123 
Recovery, 113, 123 
Reference giOUps 86-87, 98 
Regional marketing, 17 



Regulators, 123 
Reinforcement of behavior, 88 
Relationship marketing, 10 
Relevant. Knowledge, 27 
Religion, as marketing factor, 38, 141 
Repositioning, product, 166 
Research, marketing. See Marketing 

research 
Research design, 59-67, 70 

anticipating results/making report, 
66-67 

choosing approach, 59-60 

data collection methods, 61-66 

determining types of data needed, 
60 

locating sources of data, 60-61 

sample selection, 66 
Reseller markets, 30 
ReselJers, new product ideas generated 

by, 175 
Retailing: 258-263, 276 

nonstore, 261-263, 276 

structure of, 259-263 
Role expectations, 86 
Rosso, Jean-Pierre, 72 
Route salesperson, 214 
Routinization, 256, 276 



Sales. See also Personal selling 

growth in, 159 

new product ideas generated by 
salesperson, 174 

orientation, 8 

presentation, 216—218 

pricing and, 231 

research on, 55 
Sales promotion, 204-207, 222 

campaign, role in, 198 

defined, 190 

internet/personal computer deals, 
235-236 

research on, 56 

types of, 207, 209 
Sales teams, 219 

Sample selection (market research), 66 
Scandinavian Airlines (SAS), 20-21 
Schultz, Don, 188,212-213 
Screening, new product development, 

175-176 
Seasonal discounts, 239, 248 
Secondary source data, 60-61, 71 
Self-reporting surveys, 65-66 
Seller's market, 29 
Selling. See Sales 



Semi direct exporting, 131, 148 

Service products, 20, 213-215 
business services, 156 
channel distribution, 256- 257 
characteristics of, 157-159 
goods compared, 13-15, 157 
supporting services, 164-165 

Shopping goods, 155 

Shopping malls, 260-261 

Shopping orientation, 90 

Single-base segmentation strategy, 44, 
50 

Situation analysis, 19, 135 

Snowbail.com, 78 

Social class, 85-86, 98 

Social environment, effect on market- 
ing plan of trends in, 115-120, 
139-141 

Socialization, 88, 98 

Social responsibility, 110 

Societal marketing concept, 110 

Special offers, 204-207, 209, 222-223 

Specialty goods, 155-156 

Spending patterns, 111-112 

Spiffs, 240, 248 

Spokespersons, use of, 88. See also 
Opinion leaders 

SRllnternational,40-4 1 

Standard Industrial Classification 
(SIC), 43, 50 

Storytelling, 80 

Straight extension, 136, 149 

Strategic planning. See Marketing plan 

Struven, Tom and Sally, 224- 225 

Supplier (organizational buying), 
94-95,106 

Surveys. See Questionnaires 

Survival, pricing for, 231 



Tangible product, 153 

Target audience/market, 31, 188-189 

communicating to, 190 

selecting, 45-46, 195 
Tariffs, 143-144, 148 
Technical salesperson, 215 
Technology, 123 

international marketing, effect on, 
144 

lifestyle, effect on, 120-121 

marketing plan and, 113-115 
Teen Research Unlimited, 78 
Test marketing, 178-180 
Time customs, as factor in international 
marketing, 141 



INDEX 287 



Toyota Motors, 9, 128, 151- 152 

Trade allowances, 239-240 

Trade deals, 209, 223 

Trade discounts, 239, 248 

Trade intermediaries, 133 

Trademark, 163 

Trading blocs and agreements, 

143- 144 
Transaction, 4, 8, 24 
Trans World Airlines, Inc.. 99-100 

U 

Ultimate users, 36—41, 49. See also 

Consumer 
Undifferentiated markets, 32-33,49 
Unilever, 149-150 
United Air Lines, 9 
United Techtronics, 249-250 
U.S. Commercial Centers, 132 
Usage market segments, 38-39 
Usage rate, 49 
User status, 49 



VALSNALS 2, 40-42 
Value-added elements, product, 228 
Value-based pricing, 244-246, 248 
Values, 85, 118-119, 140-141 
Vehicles, electric, 101- 102, 113 
Vendors. See Supplier (organizational 

buying) 
Vertical marketing system, 268, 277 
Vos, Ron, 46 

W 

Wainwright, Julie, 179 
Wall Street Journal (wsj.com) 
buyer behavior, 97 
distribution channels, 275 
external factors affecting market- 
ing plan, 122 
international marketing, 147 
marketing research, 69 
market segmentation, 48 
mass communication, 221 
overview, 23 



product planning and strategy for- 
mulation, 181 

product pricing, 247 
Walsh, Jerry, 185-186 
Walton, Sam, 252-253 
Wants 

actuaUpotential, 28, 44-45 

defined, 75-76, 98 
Warehouse retailing, 259 
Warranties, product, 164 
Wasow, Omar J., 39 
Weaver, Mark, 179 
Webb-Pomerene Export Association, 

131,148 
Wholesaling, 263-264, 276 

functions of, 263-264 

types of, 264, 266 
Wm. Wrigley Jr. Company, 53-54 
World Wide Web. See Internet 



Youth market, 36-37, 46, 73-74, 78, 
87, 118 




Skip to main content
Texts
Video
Audio
Software
Images

    Sign up for free
    Log in

Search metadata
Search text contents
Search TV news captions
Search radio transcripts
Search archived web sites
Advanced Search

    About Blog Projects Help Donate 

    Contact Jobs Volunteer People 

Full text of "Project Management Skills for All Careers"
See other formats

Project Management 
Skills for All Careers 

By Project Management Open Resources and 
TAP-a-PM 

Foreword by Daniel Dishno, Occupational 
Training Institute, De Anza College 



@_® 



Creative Commons Attribution Unported 3.0 CC BY 201 1 



Copyright © 2011, 2012 by Project Management Open Resources and TAP-a-PM 

Edition 2 January, 2012 



© © 



Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Imported (CC BY 3.0) 

Bound Book 

ISBN- 10: 0984813802 

ISBN- 13: 978-0-9848138-0-3 

ebook 

ISBN-10: 0984813810 

ISBN- 13: 978-0-9848138-1-0 

Based on Project Management for Scientists and Engineers by 
Merrie Barron and Andrew Barron 
http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1 .4/ 

Significant contributions from the following sources 

Maura Irene Jones, Career Descriptions in Chapter 1 

Several photographs Copyright © 201 1 by Maura Irene Jones 

Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 CC BY 

Attribution URL http://www.linkedin.com/in/maurajones 

Randy Fisher, Chapter 12 
(a subset of Organization Management and Development at http://wikieducator.org/QMD/Culture_PM) 

Rekha Raman, Microsoft Word template and formatting 

Ali Daimee, syllabus and more 

Mike Milos, syllabus 

Shuly Cooper, reviews 

Bob Sawyer, Project Manager for the Saylor Foundation proposal 

Victor Cesena, Project Manager for the bound textbook 

Jim Huether, Program Manager 

Jacky Hood, Managing Editor 

See Appendix C for references used in the Barron & Barron book and in this book. 



Author and Editor Bios 



Project Management Open Resources (PMOR) is an organization dedicated to 
creating, publicizing, and distributing open-licensed project management information. PMOR's 
community includes over 60 members, many with extensive project management experience and 
certifications. See http://proiectmanaqementopenresources.ninq.com/ . 

Tap-a-PM is a cooperative association of project and program managers founded in 
February of 2008 that acts as a source of accomplished program and project managers with full 
project life-cycle skills across a set of disciplines and industries. The association supports its 
members with a wealth of domain expertise and connections into the wider project and program 
management community. Tap-a-PM members include highly-qualified project and program 
managers with over 200 years of project/program management experience with backgrounds in 
software, computers, electronics, IT, on-line learning, instrumentation, telecom, bio-tech, and 
more. See http://www.tapapm.orq/ . 

Professor Andrew Barron co-authored Project Management for Scientists and 
Engineers. He is the Charles W. Duncan, Jr-. — Welch Chair of Chemistry, a Professor of 
Materials Science, and the Associate Dean for Industry Interactions and Technology Transfer at 
Rice University. See http://chemistry.rice.edu/FacultyDetail.aspx?RicelD=585 . 

Merrie Barron, a Project Management Professional and Certified Scrum Master, co- 
authored Project Management for Scientists and Engineers. She teaches project management for 
science and engineering at Rice University. See http://www.linkedin.com/in/merriephinney . 

Victor Cesena is a Project Management Professional (PMP) and Certified Scrum Master 
(CSM). His extensive project management experience includes stints at Electronics for Imaging, 
Read-Rite, Sumitomo, Hitachi Metals, Tri-media, Kennedy, Eikon, and Ampex. Victor holds an 
Electrical Engineering degree from the University of the Pacific. 

Shuly Cooper is president of PhytoScience, Inc. She has extensive experience in 
software quality engineering at companies including Verano, Spyglass, Space Systems Loral, 
Micro Focus, and Sybase. Shuly holds a Masters in Biochemistry from the Hebrew University 
and a PhD in Biophysics from the Weizmann Institute of Science. 

Ali Daimee recently completed certification in program management at the University of 
California at Santa Cruz. He has taught project management at the University of California - 
Irvine, and Northwestern Pacific University. In his career Ali has worked for companies such as 
Broadcom, Sega, Sun, Oracle, Tandem, Compaq, Novell, Novellus, Cadence, Nortel, Control 
Data, Honeywell, and ICL. He has also co-founded startup companies managing development of 
web and network application products. Ali holds honors degrees in Mathematics and Electrical 
Engineering from London University. 

Madhurika Dev, a project management consultant, has a track record of successfully 
managing software development projects through all phases of the project lifecycle. She has 
worked for FieldDay Solutions, Sourcecorp HealthServe, Cisco, HP and Sabre. Madhurika holds 
an MS in Mathematics from the University of Texas at Arlington. 

Page 3 of 135 



Randy Fisher holds certifications in advanced technology management and instructional 
design. He is the Manager of Community Service Learning at the University of Ottawa's Centre 
for Global and Community Engagement. He has made significant contributions to the 
Community College Consortium for Open Education Resources, the Commonwealth of 
Learning, the OER Foundation and WikiEducator. Randy holds an MA in Organization 
Management and Development and a post-graduate degree in Journalism, 

Jacky Hood is a program manager, service/support executive, management consultant, 
and educator. Prior to serving as Director of College Open Textbooks, her clients included 
Apple, HP, IBM, RightWave, and Slam Dunk Networks. She has published four books and 
numerous articles, and won writing awards from McGraw-Hill and Patton Consultants. Jacky 
holds a Masters of Systems Engineering from Carleton University, Ottawa, and a Bachelors 
degree in Electrical Engineering from the University of Nebraska. 

Jim Huether, a Certified Scrum Master, has served as Program/Project Manager for 
companies such as Philips Semiconductors, Logitech, and Symantec, as well as Foothill College 
and College Open Textbooks, where he led the development of several on-line courses. Jim has 
also taught several courses in project management. Prior to this, he served in software 
development management positions for a number of companies before founding Nchant, an 
invention, licensing and product development company. Jim holds both a Bachelors degree and a 
Masters degree in Electrical Engineering from Rice University. 

Mike Milos is a senior consultant at Deloitte & Touche, and teaches a system 
development lifecycle class at both undergraduate and graduate levels at the University of 
Phoenix In the past he has worked for Hewlett-Packard, Network Appliance, KLA-Tencor, and 
the US Navy. Mike holds a Masters degree in Computer Information Systems and a Bachelors 
degree in Information Technology from the University of Phoenix. 

Maura Jones is a Project Management Professional, and holds certifications in audit 
(ISACA CISA) and security (ISC2 CISSP). Maura has provided project management expertise to 
a variety of global clients, and taught Business Data Communications and eCommerce at the 
University of San Francisco and Notre Dame de Namur University. Maura holds an MS in 
Telecommunications Management from Golden Gate University, a BS in Psychology from San 
Jose State University, and Certificates in Project Management from UC Berkeley and Stanford. 
Maura is active in professional organizations, including PMI and ITIL. 

Rekha Raman, a Project Management Professional, is a marketing communications 
manager at LitePoint, responsible for a wide spectrum of documents, including datasheets, quick 
start guides, user manuals, field service instructions, and regulatory documents. With over 15 
years of experience in technical writing, Rekha' s interests range from effective communications 
to marine biology to wireless technology. On behalf of College Open Textbooks, she reviewed 
the Project Management for Scientists and Engineers textbook. 

Lalit Sabnani is APICS certified and is working on his Project Management Professional 
certification. He has led large and complex development programs across a 25-year career in 
data storage and semiconductor technology. On behalf of College Open Textbooks, he reviewed 
the Project Management for Scientists and Engineers textbook. Lalit holds an MS in Industrial 
Engineering from Arizona State University and a BS in Mechanical Engineering from MS 
University in India. 

Page 4 of 135 



Bob Sawyer, a consultant in product management and product marketing, has worked for 
a wide range of technology companies, both large and small, including IBM, Solid, Panta, HP, 
Compaq, and Tandem. He holds a Bachelors degree from Northwestern University and a Masters 
degree from the Kellogg School of Management. 

Dalvinder Singh Matharu has worked as a project manager for 3 years and has been a 
team member for more than 15 years. He is a Project Management Professional (PMP) and a 
Certified Scrum Master (CSM). 

Daria Hemmings holds an MA in Creative Writing from Emerson College and 
a Certificate in Systems Analysis from Northeastern University. She has taught Freshman 
Composition at Emerson College and Craven Community College.. 



Page 5 of 135 



Foreword 

Daniel Dishno, Supervisor, Occupational Training Center, 
De Anza College, Cupertino, CA, USA 



Every organization has a purpose for existing. It has a set of ongoing organized functions 
and structures (aka work) that have been established to accomplish something that relates to the 
purpose of the organization. At a college, instructors teach classes, counselors provide academic 
advice, and administrators guide the day to day operations. This is not project management, it is 
ongoing work. Project Management Skills for All Careers defines project management as "the 
application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques applied to project activities in order to 
meet project requirements. Project management is a process that includes planning, putting the 
project plan into action, and measuring progress and performance. Projects are unique, 
temporary in nature and have a definite beginning and end. Projects are completed when the 
project goals are achieved. A successful project is one that meets or exceeds the expectations of 
the stakeholders." 

In our department at the college, we have projects. Mainly these projects originate from 
grants and contracts. In developing a grant proposal or contract, team members gather around 
and look at what is required in the grant and try and figure out how best to submit a competitive 
proposal. Sometimes we are overwhelmed when we read what is expected. Sometimes we laugh, 
and we face our fears and proceed into the unknown. Our projects usually involve job training 
and job placement services, catering to a specified group of unemployed clients such as refugees, 
laid-off high tech workers, or welfare recipients. After reading Project Management Skills for All 
Careers, I realized the project plan is the same as a grant proposal or contract. 

This is exciting stuff. We are bringing something new to the campus. A new group of 
students that just arrived from some war-torn country training for a job, a laid-off worker re- 
training for a new career, a welfare mom gaining skills to be self-sufficient, a new skills training 
program. 

I read Project Management Skills for All Careers in less than one week, and I feel better 
equipped in planning, implementing, measuring, changing and completing projects. This book 
refreshed my passion for my work. I am excited to have this book in my arsenal of professional 
resources. 

Project Management Skills for All Careers offers a framework for managing projects in 
any career area. The concepts can be applied no matter where you work. As a matter of fact, 
many of our dislocated workers are trained to become certified in Project Management. Project 
management skills are essential and invaluable for anyone who initiates or is assigned to a 
project. Project Management Skills for All Careers is a unique book, as it is current, well 
organized, a pleasure to read. It is available as an open source textbook, free to those who use 
and apply it in their work place. 



Page 6 of 135 



Preface 



When an opportunity presents itself, we look around for people with these skills: 
leadership, decisiveness, scoping, identifying tasks and deliverables, defining relationships 
among tasks, finding and assigning resources, scheduling, and budgeting. We also want soft 
skills including building relationships, communicating with all concerned parties, and motivating 
people to produce quality work quickly and efficiently. 

Similarly when confronted with a problem such as a natural disaster, many of the same 
skills are required. 

For more than half a century, project managers have learned and applied these skills in 
engineering, science, construction, and more. Today's rapidly-changing world calls for 
expanding the use of project management skills to many more industries and careers. 

Managing repetitive work, process management, was the norm for centuries. Agriculture, 
manufacturing, retail, transportation, and other endeavors remained the same for years or 
decades. Those days are past. The world is moving much faster and all processes must change 
often. Changing a process is a project and it demands project management skills. No longer can a 
business manager, nurse, teacher, or any other worker assume that he or she can learn a routine 
and then repeat it for years. 

The mission of this textbook is two-fold: 



• 



To provide students with project management skills they can apply in any chosen 
profession. 

• To provide instructors with an open- licensed textbook they can freely copy, move 
into a learning management system; and modify to suit their teaching style, student 
demographics, available teaching time, and more. 

With attribution to the original authors Merrie Barron and Andrew Barron, the Project 
Management Open Resources community, the TAP-a-PM project/program management 
cooperative, and other sources, any instructor, indeed any person or organization, may freely use 
and even sell the materials in this textbook. Please include the information on the copyright page 
in your attribution. 

Our project team invites all users of this textbook to learn, have fun, and be successful in 
their chosen careers. 



Page 7 of 135 



A Word to Business School and 
Other Instructors 



The following syllabus is suggested for an introductory 15-week one-semester class in 
project management for business school students. For shorter terms such as 12-week quarters or 
multi-day workshops in industry, chapters 1-6 could be covered in a single session, and chapters 
17 and 18 omitted and saved for an advanced class. 

This textbook could also be used in many vocational programs; examples appear in 
Chapter 1. The particular skills needed in those occupations could be addressed, e.g., scheduling 
and budgeting. 



Week/ 
Session 

# 


Book 
Part 

# 


Book 
Chapter 

# 


Topic Covered 


Assignment 


1 


I 


1,2,3,4, 
5 


Definition and characteristics of 
Project; Project Management and 
its history; Various applications 
Project Management and its 
benefits to business; Participants 
in Project Management its 
beneficiaries 


Form small teams of 3-5 
students; Brainstorm about 
a specific business the team 
wants to select and define a 
project for your team 


2 




6 


Skill set and expertise necessary 
for a successful Project Manager; 
Examples and Challenges faced 
by a Project Manager; Focus on 
Interpersonal skills - the most 
important tool set 


Practice interpersonal skills 
among your team members 
using role play and 
recognize leadership traits 
of your team 


3 




7 


The Project Life Cycle and its 
phases - key activities, focus, and 
challenges of each phase 


Define key deliverables per 
each phase for your teams 
project and define 
beginning and end of these 
phases for your project 


4 


II 


8, 9, 10, 
11, 12 


Recognizing stakeholders, Project 
Political Environment, 
Organizational Culture and their 
importance in Project Initiation; 
Types of Project Management 
Certification and their benefits 


Define your team's project 
environment, stakeholders, 
organizational culture, 
policies and initiate your 
project 



Page 8 of 135 



Week/ 
Session 

# 


Book 
Part 

# 


Book 
Chapter 

# 


Topic Covered 


Assignment 


5 


III 


13, 14 


Inputs to Project Planning Phase, 
Factors considered during the 
Scope planning step of Project 
Planning 


Develop the scope of your 
teams project 


6 




15 


Schedule Planning step - tools 
and techniques - types of 
schedules and their 
characteristics; Activities, 
dependencies, relationships, 
graphical presentation, tracking, 
etc. 


Develop a Work 
Breakdown Structure for 
your project, define 
activities and create a basic 
network diagram 


7 




16 


Resource Planning step - 
Defining effort, durations and 
type of resources required for a 
project - types of estimates, tools 
used, adding information to the 
project schedule 


Define resource needed for 
each activity, duration 
allowed and the effort 
required for your project - 
Update your project plan 
with this information 


8 




17 


Budget Planning - Consideration 
of costs and tradeoffs of various 
execution options such as 
Company Internal cost of doing 
the project versus contracting or 
subcontracting all part of the 
project - developing a budget for 
the project 


Develop a budget for your 
project considering a mix 
of subcontractors and 
internal resources 


9 




18 


Risk and its definition; Risk 
identification process, Probability 
and impact consideration of 
Risks; Developing a Risk 
Register and identifying various 
Risk mitigation options. 


Identify Risks on your 
project, their probability 
and impact, rank them and 
determine their triggers and 
mitigation options 


10 




19 


Quality Planning considerations - 
Regulatory requirements, 
Industry standards, Internal 
Policies and guidelines, Quality 
monitoring and control, Quality 
Assurance and its benefits 


Define a Quality plan for 
your project - consider 
Regulatory requirements, 
customer satisfaction, etc. 



Page 9 of 135 



Week/ 
Session 

# 


Book 
Part 

# 


Book 
Chapter 

# 


Topic Covered 


Assignment 


11 




20 


Communications Planning - 
Defining communications 
channels, types of 
communications, amount of 
communications, Defining 
Interfaces with Internal and 
external stakeholders, 
consideration of conflicts and 
their resolution, etc. 


Create a communications 
plan for your project 
employing techniques 
learned in this chapter 


12 




21 


Completing the overall Project 
Planning as the final deliverable 
from the Project Planning Phase 


Review your overall 
project plan and optimize it 
as necessary 


13 


IV 


22 


Project Implementation Phase and 
its tracking and control - Need 
for replanning as and when 
needed; tools and techniques of 
Project control 


Define change control plan 
for your project 


14 




23 


Project Completion and how to 
recognize it - various actions 
involved in closing a project - 
importance of lessons learned and 
the celebration 


Identify closing actions for 
your project and document 
Lessons Learned. 


15 




Final 


Final review and Team 
presentations 





Page 10 of 135 



COMPLETE TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Author and Contributor Bios 

Foreword 

Preface 

A Word to Business School and other Instructors 

PART I - INTRODUCTION 

Chapter 1: Jump -Start Any Career with Project Management Skills 

1 . 1 Careers Using Project Management Skills 

1.2 Business Owners 

1 . 3 Construction Manager 

1.4 Creative Services 

1.5 Educator 

1.6 Engineers 

1.7 Healthcare Careers 

1.8 Paralegal 

1.9 Software developer/computer programmer 

1.10 Scientist Technicians 
Chapter 2: History of Project Management 
Chapter 3: What is a Project? 

3.1 A Formal Definition of a Project 
Chapter 4: Project Characteristics 
Chapter 5: What is Project Management? 
Chapter 6: Project Management Areas of Expertise 

6.1 Application knowledge; standards & regulations 

6.2 Understanding the Project Environment 

6.3 Management Knowledge and Skills 

Page 11 of 135 



6.4 Interpersonal Skills 
Chapter 7: The Project Life Cycle 

7 . 1 Initiation Phase 

7.2 Planning Phase 

7.3 Implementation Phase 

7.4 Closing Phase 
PART II - PROJECT STRATEGY 
Chapter 8: Project Stakeholders 

8.1 Top Management 

8.2 The Project Team 

8.3 Your Manager 

8.4 Peers 

8.5 Resource Managers 

8.6 Internal Customer 

8.7 External customer 

8.8 Government 

8.9 Contractors, subcontractors, and suppliers 
Chapter 9: The Politics of Projects 

9.1 Assess the environment 

9.2 Identify goals 

9.3 Define the problem 
Chapter 10: Project Initiation 

Chapter 11: Project Management Certifications 

11.1 Project Management Institute Overview 

11.2 Scrum Development Overview 
Chapter 12: Culture and Project Management 

12.1 What is Organizational Culture? 

12.2 Project Manager's Checklist 



Page 12 of 135 



12.3 Project Team Challenges 

12.4 Dealing with Conflict 

12.4 Bibliography for Chapter 12 
PART III - PROJECT PLANNING 
Chapter 13: Overview of Project Planning 
Chapter 14: Scope Planning 

14.1 Defining the Scope 

14.2 Project Requirements 

14.3 Functional Requirements 

14.4 Non-Functional Requirements 

14.5 Technical Requirements 

14.6 User Requirements 

14.7 Business Requirement 

14.8 Regulatory requirements 

14.9 An Example of Requirements 
Chapter 15: Project Schedule Planning 

15.1 Preparing the work breakdown structure 

15.2 A case study 

15.3 Activity Definition 

15.4 Leads and Lags 

15.4 Milestones 

15.5 The Activity Sequencing Process 

15.6 Creating the Network Diagram 
Chapter 16: Resource Planning 

16.1 Estimating the Resources 

16.2 Estimating Activity Durations 

16.3 Project Schedule 
Chapter 17: Budget Planning 



Page 13 of 135 



17.1 Make or Buy Analysis 

17.2 Contract Types 
Chapter 18: Risk Management Planning 
Chapter 19: Quality Planning 

19.1 Quality planning tool 
Chapter 20: Communication Planning 
Chapter 21: Bringing it all together 
Part IV - IMPLEMENTATION and CLOSING 
Chapter 22: Project Implementation Overview 

22. 1 Change control 
Chapter 23: Project Completion 

23.1 Lessons learned 

23.2 Contract closure 

23.3 Releasing project team 

23.4 Celebrate! 
Appendix A: Solutions to Exercises 

Solution to Exercise 10.1 
Solution to Exercise 1 5 
Solutions to Exercises in Chapter 16 
Appendix B: Glossary of Project Management Terms 
Appendix C: Attributions and Bibliography 



Page 14 of 135 




PART I - INTRODUCTION 




New Moon Copyright ©TallPomlin CC BY 

http://www.flickr.eom/photos/paultonilin/364907230/sizes/m/in/photostream/ 



Page 15 of 135 



Chapter 1 : Jump-Start Any Career with Project Management 
Skills 

1.1 Careers Using Project Management Skills: 



Skills learned by your exposure to studying project management can be used in most 
careers as well as in your daily life. Strong planning skills, good communication, ability to 
implement a project to deliver the product or service while also monitoring for risks and 
managing the resources, will provide an edge towards your success. Project Managers can be 
seen in many industry sectors including: Agriculture and Natural Resources; Arts, Media and 
Entertainment; Building Trades and Construction; Energy and Utilities; Engineering and Design; 
Fashion and Interiors; Finance and Business; Health and Human Services; Hospitality, Tourism 
and Recreation; Manufacturing and Product Development; Public and Private Education 
Services; Public Services; Retail and Wholesale Trade; Transportation; and Information 
Technology. 

Below we explore various careers and some of the ways in which project management 
knowledge can be leveraged. 



1.2 



Business Owners 



Business owners definitely need to have some project management skills. With all 
successful businesses, the product or service that is being delivered to the customer meets their 
needs in many ways. The product or service is of the quality desired, the costs are aligned with 
what the consumer expected, and the timeliness of that product or service meets the deadline for 
the buyer of that item. 




Copyright © 201 1 by Maura Irene Jones 

Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 CC BY 
Attribution URL http://www.linkedin.com/in/maurajones 



The pillars of project management are delivering a product/service within schedule, cost, 
scope, and quality requirements. Business owners need planning, organizing, and scoping skills 

Page 16 of 135 



and the ability to analyze, communicate, budget, staff, equip, implement and deliver. 




Copyright © 201 1 by Maura Irene Jones 

Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 CC BY 
Attribution URL http://www.linkedin.com/in/maurajones 

Understanding the finances, the operations, and the expenses of the business are among 
the skills that project managers learn and practice. Some businesses may focus more on 
accounting, providing financial advice, sales, training, public relations, and actuary or logistician 
roles. Business owners may own a travel agency or could provide hospitality. Business owners 
could be managing a store front or a location in their town's marketplace. 




Copyright © 201 1 by Maura Irene Jones 

Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 CC BY 
Attribution URL http://www.linkedin.com/in/maurajones 



1.2.1 Example: Restaurant Owner/Manager 

Restaurant Managers are responsible for the daily operations of a restaurant that prepares 
and serves meals and beverages to the customers. Strong planning skills, especially coordinating 



Page 17 of 135 



with the various departments (kitchen, dining room, banquet operations, food service managers, 
vendors providing the supplies) ensure that customers are satisfied with their dining experience. 
Managers' ability to recruit and retain employees, and monitor employee performance and 
training ensure quality with cost containment. Scheduling in many aspects, not only the staff but 
also the timing of the food service deliveries, is critical in meeting customer expectations. 

Risk management is essential to ensure food safety and quality. Managers monitor orders 
in the kitchen to determine where delays may occur, and they work with the chef to prevent these 
delays. Legal compliance is essential in order for the restaurant to stay open, so Restaurant 
Managers direct the cleaning of the dining areas and the washing of tableware, kitchen utensils, 
and equipment. They ensure the safety standards and legality, especially in serving alcohol. 
Sensitivity and strong communication skills are needed when customers have complaints or 
employees feel pressured because more customers arrive than the forecast predicted. 

Financial knowledge is needed for the soundness of running the restaurant, especially 
tracking special projects, events, and costs for the various menu selections. Catering events 
smoothly can be an outcome of using project plans and the philosophy of project management. 
The Restaurant Managers or the executive chef analyzes the recipes to determine food, labor, and 
overhead costs, determine the portion size and nutritional content of each serving, and assigns 
prices to various menu items, so that supplies can be ordered and received in time. 




Copyright © 201 1 by Maura I Jones 

Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 CC BY 
Attribution URL http://www.linkedin.com/in/maurajones 



Planning is the key for successful implementation. Managers or executive chefs need to 
estimate food needs, place orders with distributors, and schedule the delivery of fresh food and 
supplies. They also plan for routine services (equipment maintenance, pest control, waste 
removal) and deliveries including linen services or the heavy cleaning of dining rooms or kitchen 
equipment, to occur during slow times or when the dining room is closed. A successful 
restaurant relies on many skills that the project management profession emphasizes. 

Many businesses may explore outsourcing for certain services. Below is a sample status 
and project plan that reflects the various tasks needed for the project. A review of finances, the 
importance of communicating to stakeholders, and the importance of time, cost, schedule, scope, 
and quality are reflected. Many companies may use these steps in their business. These plans 



Page 18 of 135 



show the need for the entire team to review the various proposals to choose the best plan. 



Svars ititt = 



Svc S o u re i n g I n iti ati ve Status Re p o rt 1 0/1 4/00 






Kie^ Accomplish mentt: 

■ I>e'>M laraon o'sav us- urraTsanaCoaaEl-rO 

■ Go "is a™ Eojri-rj Edo-eot -OE, it .aja ^>sawaf^: r 2 

DOCLTDHT 

■ Oonrtjcoeri navtow olltnlRFQ wrh ^.ar: EoaartTj Qmhs 
on 1«12 



Ke^ U pcomlng Aettvlttet: 



Oa"io ea =t- 2 TaTTica S. - x.z ana reoMrernra 

^:a uh R r 2 coc j*tzi ■£• E-CC03- on 10 1 + 

- ia la R r 2 Eva -ECD-tIt oarn ■£ Ecor "a KteT x 

Ekow :a S. j iI tarsal nqj res-raoa vac c j -<s Eccars IS*, oar oc 

E ccars RasM-a^so Ji-a . J BC "c 1L51A0O 




T. r ji Z : i. -rav *r all*: w t raeasaro Is of Ik saar™ uooets-s-tpi jee iof 101 + 



N/A ■Ftnia PTO.aZ. TOETTHDI XC3.TDEJ 



=ro.a— Tti"i -cud-iSESka-iaicers-a-icsoaar n i-'ntosa'TS^Das'rialitoaT n oboe 



So j: -fi Eco-eot _OE-a-rt _aca Retcx of ^: r 2 cocnaT nud n axfova o 1 f ->a T2 oozj"ei: zonocoa 









Sample status chart which is typical with the use of a red-yellow-green 
Copyright © 201 1 by Maura Irene Jones 

Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 CC BY 
Attribution URL http://www.linkedin.com/in/maurajones 

















RFC] Task Name 
















:;■,;,- i- -,:.■:■:. ... 
































, , 


Define Hf-O Ob,ectlw!s: Draft S Approve Sourcing Plan 


100% 


Sourcing (1)/ Sponsors (2) 




































































1 a 


K L-.k-.-jir HI O Pio|ect with Key Stakeholders: Establish 
Baseline S R ; ... ;>■-;■-■: jfi -.v -■■. tiiakeholders 


100% 


Sourcing/Key Stakeholders 








































■.,-.?;-.; 








^1 












































22 


Develop RFO 1 .=■;■ i .i - .1 ,-. : i:ii.\-i-,iv, I-:-.:; i Clients; Draft RFO 
Document 


,00% 


All Key Stakeholders 






























34 


tii.. i.:i-..:. Sponsor, LOB. and Legal Hsvi~.,\ ■::' l- : O Lii... uneii:. 
Approval of final HI Q cioi-.u're'-t 


1 00% 


































... _ ■. iir,'ts to Bidoers 










































All Key Stakeholders 




























Bidders QSA period 






























HI a (Round I. Responses due to MIJ 




Bidders 








































'-■■■::. ::..'.■■■■.■■ ;.:■■;■:..;::■■ .-,-:■::: 




,■■■. 1 ■.,;:,.■ ■.■,i-l..- |-,:-i . 
































Round 1 Responses reviewed bv MIJ Stakeholders 




,M :..-, ■,;■,: ,;..,,.., 
















1 
















Hs.ur.j if | .." -.,..-. *...... .- .1.1-1 




Sourcing 


















































































A ■ 


etZto 2 n7nte ria a l E naMzed S,ed *"" ' ina " S ' E ""* R ° Und * 


0% 




































Round 2 Response due to MIJ 






































Round 2 Evaluated and scored 




All Key Stakeholders 
















































Bidder Selection: 




























L ■;■;.■ ■ i-,.-,,-:.!:< . :.-k- -:■.:■ I 




All Key Stak-al .uli-^i :. 




















i 


' 










Sourcing 


















































































































Final Legal review and Co trad acj ■■ i 












































Sourcing 






























o 




































































1 

































: + Milestone + Decision Requl 

^H Complete I I In progress 



Sample project plan exploring outsourcing of services 



Page 19 of 135 



Copyright © 201 1 by Maura Irene Jones 

Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 CC BY 
Attribution URL http://www.linkedin.com/in/maurajones 

1.3 Construction Manager 

Construction managers plan, direct, coordinate, and budget a wide variety of residential, 
commercial, and industrial construction projects including homes, stores, offices, roads, bridges, 
wastewater treatment plants, schools, and hospitals. Strong scheduling skills are essential for this 
role. Communication skills are often used in coordination of design and construction processes, 
teams executing the work and governance of special trades (carpentry, plumbing, electrical 
wiring) as well as government representatives for the permit processes. 

The Construction Manager may be called a project manager or project engineer. The 
Construction Manager ensures that the project gets completed on time and within budget while 
meeting quality specifications and codes and maintaining a safe work environment. These 
managers create project plans in which they divide all required construction site activities into 
logical steps, estimating and budgeting the time required to meet established deadlines, usually 
utilizing sophisticated scheduling and cost-estimating software. Many use software packages 
such as Microsoft Project® or Procure® or online tools like BaseCamp®. Most construction 
projects rely on spreadsheets for project management. Procurement skills used in this field 
include acquiring the bills of material, lumber for the house being built, and more. Construction 
managers also cording labor, determining the needs and overseeing their performance, ensuring 
that all work is completed on schedule. 




Copyright © 201 1 by Jennifer Russell 

Creative Commons Attributions 3.0 CC BY 
Attribution URL: http://www.Tharpo.com 

Values including sustainability, reuse, LEED-certified building, incorporating green 
energy, and various energy efficiencies are being incorporated into today's future projects. Ms. 
Jennifer Russell, spoke about "Project Management and Global Sustainability" at the 2011 
Silicon Valley Project Management Institute (PMI) conference. She informed the attendees of 
the financial, environmental, and social areas in expanding the vision of project management 
with the slide shown here. These values are part of the PMI's Code of Ethics and professionalism 

Page 20 of 135 



in which the project manager includes in their decisions the best interest of society, the safety of 
the public, and enhancement of the environment. 

1.4 Creative Services 



Creative service careers include graphic artists, curators, video editors, gaming managers, 
multimedia artists, media producers, technical writers, interpreter, and translators. These 
positions use project management skills, especially in handling the delivery channel and meeting 
clients' requirements. 

Let us look at one example, graphic artists, to understand and identify some of the project 
management skills that aid in this career. 

1.4.1 Graphic Artists 



Graphic artists plan, analyze, and create visual solutions to communications problems. 
They use many skills found in project management, especially communications. They work to 
achieve the most effective way to get messages across in print and electronic media. They 
emphasize their messages using color, type, illustration, photography, animation, and various 
print and layout techniques. Results can be seen in magazines, newspapers, journals, corporate 
reports, and other publications. Other deliverables from Graphic Artists using project 
management skills include promotional displays, packaging, and marketing brochures supporting 
products and services, logos, and signage. In addition to print media, graphic artists create 
materials for the web, TV, movies, and mobile device apps. 

Initiation in project management can be seen in developing a new design: determining the 
needs of the client, the message the design should portray, and its appeal to customers or users. 
Graphic designers consider cognitive, cultural, physical, and social factors in planning and 
executing designs for the target audience, very similar to some of the dynamics a project 
manager considers in communicating with various project stakeholders. Designers may gather 
relevant information by meeting with clients, creative staff, or art directors; brainstorming with 
others within their firm or professional association, and by performing their own research to 
ensure that their results have high quality and to manage risks. 

Graphic designers may supervise assistants who follow instructions to complete parts of 
the design process. Therefore scheduling, resource planning, and cost monitoring are pillars of 
project management seen in this industry. These artists use computer and communications 
equipment to meet their clients' needs and business requirements in a timely and cost-efficient 
manner. 

1.5 Educators 



'Educator' is a broad term that can describe a career in teaching, maybe being a lecturer, 
a professor, a tutor, or a home- schooler. Other educators include gurus, mullahs, pastors, rabbis, 
and priests. Instructors also provide vocational training or teach skills like learning how to drive 
a car or use a computer. Educators provide motivation to learn a new language or showcase new 
products and services. Educators use project management skills including planning and 
communication. 

Let us look at a teacher since we all have had teachers and see if we can recognize the 

Page 21 of 135 



project management skills that are demonstrated in this profession. 
1.5.1 Teachers 

Some teachers foster the intellectual and social development of children during their 
formative years; other teachers provide knowledge, career skill sets and guidance to adults. 
Project management skills that teachers exhibit include acting as facilitators or coaches, 
communicating in the classroom and in individual instruction. Project managers plan and 
evaluate various aspects of a project; teachers also plan, evaluate, and assign lessons; implement 
these plans, and monitor student's progress similar to the way a project manager monitors and 
delivers goods or services. Teachers use their people skills to manage students, parents, 
administrators. The soft skills that project managers exercise can be seen in teachers encouraging 
collaboration in solving problems by having students work in groups to discuss and solve 
problems as a team. 

Project Managers may work in a variety of fields with a broad assortment of people, 
similar to teachers who work with students from varied ethnic, racial, and religious backgrounds 
with awareness and understanding of different cultures. 

Teachers in some schools may be involved in making decisions regarding the budget, 
personnel, textbooks, curriculum design, and teaching methods demonstrating skills that a 
project manager would possess such as finance, and decision making. 

1.6 Engineers 



Engineers apply the principles of science and mathematics to develop economical 
solutions to technical problems. As a project cycles from an idea in the project charter to the 
implementation and delivery of a product or service, engineers link scientific discoveries to 
commercial applications that meet societal and consumer needs. 




Copyright © Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC) 

Creative Commons Attributions 3.0 CC BY 
Attribution URL: http://www.slac.stanford.edu 



Engineers use many project management skills, especially when engineers specify the 
functional requirements. Quality is observed in engineers as they evaluate the design's overall 
effectiveness, cost, reliability, and safety similar to the project manager reviewing the criteria for 
the customer's acceptance of delivery of the product or service. 



Page 22 of 135 



Estimation skills in project management are used in Engineering. Engineers are asking 
many times to provide an estimate of time and cost required to complete projects. 

1.7 Healthcare Careers 



There are many jobs and careers in healthcare which use project management skills. The 
field of healthcare varies widely, such as athletic trainer, dental hygienist; massage therapist, 
occupational therapist, optometric, physician assistant and X-ray technicians. Again, these folks 
actively apply risk management in providing health care delivery of service to their clients, 
ensuring that they do not injury the person that they are caring for. Note: A section on nursing is 
covered within this area of the textbook. 

Many of you may have experience taking a fall while you were growing up, and needed 
an x-ray to determine if you had a fracture or merely a sprain. Hence let us look at this career as 
an example of a healthcare professional using project management skills. 

1.7.1 Radiologic Technologists and Technicians 

Radiologic technologists and technicians perform diagnostic imaging examinations like 
x-rays, computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and mammography. They could 
also be called radiographers, because they produce x-ray films (radiographs) of parts of the 
human body for use in diagnosing medical problems. 

Project management skills, especially people skills and strong communication, are 
demonstrated when they prepare patients for radiologic examinations by explaining the 
procedure and what position the patient needs to be at, so that the parts of the body can be 
appropriately radiographed. Risk management is demonstrated when these professionals work to 
prevent unnecessary exposure to radiation, these workers surround the exposed area with 
radiation protection devices, such as lead shields, or limit the size of the x-ray beam. Quality is 
needed to provide the expected results, with the health technician monitoring the radiograph and 
setting controls on the x-ray machine to produce radiographs of the appropriate density, detail, 
and contrast. 

Safety and regulations concerning the use of radiation to protect themselves, their 
patients, and their coworkers from unnecessary exposure is tracked in an efficient manner and 
reported as a control to ensure compliance. Project management skills can also be use for they 
may prepare work schedules, evaluate purchases of equipment, or manage a radiology 
department. 

Some radiologic technologists specialize in computed tomography (CT), as CT 
technologists as they too use project management skills. Since CT scans produce a substantial 
amount of cross-sectional x rays of an area of the body, the CT uses ionizing radiation; therefore, 
it requires the same precautionary measures that are used with x rays, hence the need for risk 
management and monitoring for exposure. 

Teamwork, not only with the patient which the Radiologic technologist is supporting, the 
doctor whom ordered the request, but also other healthcare providers rely on strong 
communication, quality, work done in a timely manner and using the hospital resources wisely 
boil down to ensuring that the project management triangle of cost, schedule, scope with quality 
delivered remain the essentials which provide a cornerstone to project management and the skills 

Page 23 of 135 



needed to obtain the objective. 
1.7.2 Nurse 



Nurses treat and educate patients and their family and public about various medical 
conditions and provide advice and emotional support. Nurses establish a care plan for their 
patients, activities like scheduling administering of medications as well as discontinuation of 
meds, i.e. intravenous (IV) lines for fluid, medication, blood, and blood products; applying 
therapies and treatments. Communication with the patient, their family, physicians and other 
healthcare clinicians may be done in person, or could use technology. Telehealth allows 
personnel to provide care and advice through electronic communications media including 
videoconferencing, the Internet, or by telephone. 

Risk management is very important for a nurse, with some cases having a life or death 
consequence! Monitoring of pain management and vital signs and providing status to physicians 
help in responding to the health care needs of the patient. 

The nursing field varies. Some nurses work in Infection control. They identify, track, and 
control infectious outbreaks in healthcare facilities and create programs for outbreak prevention 
and response to biological terrorism. Others are Educators, nurses who plan, develop, execute 
and evaluate educational programs and curricula for the professional development of students 
and professional nurses. Nurses may use project management skills while conducting healthcare 
consultations, advising on public policy, researching in the field or providing sales support of a 
product or service. 

1.8 Paralegal 



Attorneys assume the ultimate responsibility for legal work but they often obtain 
assistance. Paralegals assume this role in law firms and perform many tasks to aid in the legal 
profession. However, they are explicitly prohibited from carrying out duties considered to be the 
practice of law (i.e. giving legal advice, setting legal fees, court case presentations). 

Project management skills from such as planning are used in helping lawyers prepare for 
closings, hearings, trials, and corporate meetings. Communication skills are used when 
paralegals prepare written reports that help attorneys determine how cases should be handled, or 
the preparation of various drafts, such as pleading and motions to be filed, obtain affidavits, etc. 

Monitoring tasks aid Paralegals who may track files of all important case documents, 
working on risk containment on filing dates and responses to the court. Procurement 
considerations , skills that a project manager holds, can also be seen from a paralegal 
perspective via negotiation terms of hiring expert witnesses as well as other services such as 
acquiring services from process servers. 



Page 24 of 135 







-.::.: 



■IB 



llili i iiliibLi- 



Copyright © 201 1 by Maura Irene Jones 

Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 CC BY 
Attribution URL http://www.linkedin.com/in/maurajones 



Financial skills may be use as well, such as assisting in preparing tax returns, establishing 
trust funds, and planning estates or maintain financial office records at the law firm. 

Government, litigation, personal injury, corporate law, criminal law, employee benefits, 
intellectual property, labor law, bankruptcy, immigration, family law, and real estate are many 
different law practices a Paralegal professional may experience which can use project 
management skills in these various work environments. 

1.9 Software developer/computer programmer: 



Computer software developers and computer programmers design and develop software. 
They apply the principles of computer science and mathematics to create, test, and evaluate 
software applications and systems that make computers come alive. Software is developed in 
many kinds of projects: computer games, business applications, operating systems, network 
control systems, and more. Project management skills help develop the requirements for the 
software, identify and track the product development tasks, team communications, test cases, and 
management of the quality, schedule and resources (staff, equipment, labs, and more). 

1.10 Scientist Technicians 



Science Technicians use principles and theories of science and mathematics to assist in 
research and development and to help invent and improve products and processes with their jobs 
more practically oriented than scientists. Planning skills project managers use can be seen as 
Science Technicians set up, operate, and maintain laboratory instruments, monitor experiments, 
observe, calculate and record results. Quality is a factor here as it is in Project Management, 
essential in work to ensure the processes performed correctly, with proper proportions of 
ingredients, for purity, or for strength and durability. 

There are different fields in which these scientist technicians can apply project 
management skills. Agricultural and food science technicians work with the testing on food and 

Page 25 of 135 



other agricultural products, involved in food, fiber, and animal research, production, and 
processing. Control and risk management are important here in executing the tests and 
experiments to improve the yield and quality of crops, or plants and animals resistance to 
disease, insects, or other hazards. Quality factors are emphasis when food science technicians 
may conduct tests on food additives and preservatives to ensure compliance with Food and Drug 
Administration regulations regarding color, texture, and nutrients. 




Soil chemistry — Toxins in rice plants 
Copyright © Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC) 

Creative Commons Attributions 3.0 CC BY 
Attribution URL: http://www.slac.stanford.edu 



Biological technicians work with biologists studying living organisms. Many assist 
scientists who conduct medical research or who work in pharmaceutical companies help develop 
and manufacture medicines. Skills in schedule, especially in incubation periods for the study of 
the impact on cells, could impact projects, such as exploring and isolating variables for research 
in living organisms and infectious agents. Biotechnology technicians apply knowledge and 
execution skills, techniques, gained from basic research, including gene splicing and 
recombinant DNA, and apply them to product development. Project Managers skills can be seen 
in the collaboration and communication between the team to record and understand the results 
and progress towards a cure or product. 




Photo provided by LAVA Pathology Specialists CC BY 
Other kinds of technicians could be Chemical technicians who may work in laboratories 



Page 26 of 135 



and factories, using skills of monitoring and control in the way they collect and analyze samples. 
Again, quality assurance is of concern for most process technicians' work in manufacturing, 
testing packaging for design, integrity of materials, and environmental acceptability. 

Technicians carry with them skills set from project management to assist in their 
initiation, planning, executing of their task, while managing risks with some measure of 
reporting to determine if their objectives are meet with the constraints of cost, schedule, 
resource, meeting quality standards set. 



Page 27 of 135 



Chapter 2: History of Project Management 



Could the Great Wall of China, the pyramids, or Stonehenge (Figure 2.1) have been built 
without project management? It is possible to say that the concept of project management has 
been around since the beginning of history. It has enabled leaders to plan bold and massive 
projects and manage funding, materials and labor within a designated time frame. 




Figure 2.1: Stonehenge was erected between 3,000 BC and 1,600 BC by no less than three 
different cultures and its orientation on the rising and setting sun has always been one of its 

remarkable features 

photo from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



In late 19th century, in the United States, large-scale government projects were the 
impetus for making important decisions that became the basis for project management 
methodology such as the transcontinental railroad, which began construction in the 1860s. 
Suddenly, business leaders found themselves faced with the daunting task of organizing the 
manual labor of thousands of workers and the processing and assembly of unprecedented 
quantities of raw material. 



Page 28 of 135 



Near the turn of the century, Frederick Taylor (Figure 2.2) began his detailed studies of 
work. He applied scientific reasoning to work by showing that labor can be analyzed and 
improved by focusing on its elementary parts that introduced the concept of working more 
efficiently, rather than working harder and longer. 




Figure 2.2: Frederick Taylor (1856-1915). 



photo from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



Page 29 of 135 



Taylor's associate, Henry Gantt (Figure 2.4), studied in great detail the order of 
operations in work and is most famous for developing the Gantt Chart in the 1910s. 




Figure 2.4 Henry Gantt (1861-1919) 

Photo from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 

A Gantt chart is a popular type of bar chart that illustrates a project schedule and has 
become a common technique for representing the phases and activities of a project work 
breakdown structure, so they can be understood by a wide audience (Figure 2.5). Although now 
considered a common charting technique, Gantt charts were considered quite revolutionary at the 
time they were introduced. Gantt charts were employed on major infrastructure projects 
including the Hoover Dam and the Interstate highway system and are still accepted today as 
important tools in project management. 






fak Nwe 


SSpS.'OI 


Sflmm 


Sep S3, 131 


isep3a r m 


QAJ,V\ 


i 1,1 - 


Wl F ; 5 


S | H T w i I F £ 


S H T W T F 


s|s|h t w;r f s 


S;M T W 


T F 


1 

2 


fafcl 

fa* 2 




— ^- 


— , 






3 


IttU 






? 




1 


TMM 










S 


fa* 5 




1 








1 






+ 1M 




6 


fab 8 


4 MI 


fc 


7 


Mtolonsl 






a 


MteslonsZ 











Figure 2.5: An example of a Gantt chart showing the relationship between a series of tasks. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



Page 30 of 135 



By the mid Twentieth century, projects were managed on an ad hoc basis using mostly 
Gantt Charts, and informal techniques and tools. During that time, the Manhattan project was 
initiated and its complexity was only possible because of project management methods. The 
Manhattan project was the codename given to the Allied effort to develop the first nuclear 
weapons during World War II. It involved over thirty different project sites in the US and 
Canada, and thousands of personnel from US, Canada and UK. Born out of a small research 
program that began in 1939, the Manhattan Project would eventually employ 130,000 people and 
cost a total of nearly 2 billion USD and result in the creation of multiple production and research 
sites operated in secret. The project succeeded in developing and detonating three nuclear 
weapons in 1945. 

The 1950s marked the beginning of the modern Project Management era. Two 
mathematical project-scheduling models were developed: 

The Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) was developed by Booz- Allen 
& Hamilton as part of the United States Navy's Polaris missile submarine program. PERT is 
basically a method for analyzing the tasks involved for completing a given project, especially the 
time needed to complete each task, the dependencies among tasks, and the minimum time needed 
to complete the total project (Figure 2.6). 

The Critical Path Method (CPM) developed in a joint venture by both DuPont 
Corporation and Remington Rand Corporation for managing plant maintenance projects. The 
critical path determines the float, or schedule flexibility, for each activity by calculating the 
earliest start date, earliest finish date, latest start date, and latest finish date for each activity. The 
critical path is generally the longest full path on the project. Any activity with a float time that 
equals zero is considered a critical path task. CPM can help you figure out how long your 
complex project will take to complete and which activities are critical; meaning they have to be 
done on time or else the whole project will take longer. These mathematical techniques quickly 
spread into many private enterprises. 



—3 mo 




Figure 2.6: An example of a PERT network chart for a seven-month project with five milestones. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 

Project management in its present form began to take root a few decades ago. In the early 
1960s, industrial and business organizations began to understand the benefits of organizing work 
around projects. They understood the critical need to communicate and integrate work across 
multiple departments and professions. 

Page 31 of 135 



Chapter 3: What is a Project? 



The starting point in discussing how projects should be properly managed is to first 
understand what a project is and just as importantly what it is not. 

People have been undertaking projects since the earliest days of organized human 
activity. The hunting parties of our prehistoric ancestors were projects, for example; they were 
temporary undertakings directed at the goal of obtaining meat for the community. Large complex 
projects have also been with us for a long time. The pyramids and the Great Wall of China were 
in their day of roughly the same dimensions as the Apollo Project to send men to the moon. We 
use the term project frequently in our daily conversations. A husband, for example may tell his 
wife, "My main project for this weekend is to straighten out the garage." Going hunting, building 
pyramids, and fixing faucets all share certain features that make them projects. 

A project has distinctive attributes, which distinguish it from ongoing work or business 
operations. Projects are temporary in nature. They are not an everyday business process and have 
definitive start dates and end dates. This characteristic is important because a large part of the 
project effort is dedicated to ensuring that the project is completed at the appointed time. To do 
this, schedules are created showing when tasks should begin and end. Projects can last minutes, 
hours, days, weeks, months or years. 

Projects exist to bring about a product or service that hasn't existed before. In this sense, a 
project is unique. Unique means that this is new, this has never been done before. Maybe it's 
been done in a very similar fashion before but never exactly in this way. For example, Ford 
Motor Company is in the business of designing and assembling cars. Each model that Ford 
designs and produces can be considered a project. The models differ from each other in their 
features and are marketed to people with various needs. An SUV serves a different purpose and 
clientele than a luxury model. The design and marketing of these two models are unique projects. 
However the actual assembly of the cars is considered an operation, i.e., a repetitive process that 
is followed for most makes and models. 

In contrast with projects, operations are ongoing and repetitive. They involve work that is 
continuous without an ending date and you often repeat the same processes and produce the 
same results. The purpose of operations is to keep the organization functioning while the purpose 
of a project is to meet its goals and to conclude. Therefore, operations are ongoing while projects 
are unique and temporary. 

The project is completed when its goals and objectives are accomplished. It is these goals 
that drive the project and all the planning and implementation efforts undertaken to achieve 
them. Sometimes projects end when it is determined that the goals and objectives cannot be 
accomplished or when the product or service of the project is no longer needed and the project is 
cancelled. 



3.1 A Formal Definition of a Project 



There are many written definitions of a project. All of them contain the key elements 
described above. For those looking for a formal definition of a project, PMI defines a project as a 
temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or result. The temporary 
nature of projects indicates a definite beginning and end. The end is reached when the project's 
objectives have been achieved or when the project is terminated because its objectives will not or 
cannot be met, or when the need for the project no longer exists. 



Page 33 of 135 



Chapter 4: Project Characteristics 

When considering whether or not you have a project on your hands, there are some things 
to keep in mind. First, is it a project or ongoing operation? Next, if it is a project; who are the 
stakeholders? And third, what characteristics distinguish this endeavor as a project? 

A project has several characteristics: 

Projects are unique. 
• Projects are temporary in nature and have a definite beginning and ending date. 



• 



• 



Projects are completed when the project goals are achieved or it's determined the 
project is no longer viable. 

A successful project is one that meets or exceeds the expectations of the stakeholders. 

Consider the following scenario: The VP of Marketing approaches you with a fabulous 
idea. (Obviously it must be "fabulous" because he thought of it.) He wants to set up kiosks in 
local grocery stores as mini offices. These offices will offer customers the ability to sign up for 
car and home insurance services as well as make their bill payments. He believes that the 
exposure in grocery stores will increase awareness of the company's offerings. He told you that 
senior management has already cleared the project and he'll dedicate as many resources to this as 
he can. He wants the new kiosks in place in 12 selected stores in a major city by the end of the 
year. Finally, he has assigned you to head up this project. 

Your first question should be "Is it a project?" This may seem elementary, but confusing 
projects with ongoing operations happens often. Projects are temporary in nature, have definite 
start and end dates, result in the creation of a unique product or service, and are completed when 
their goals and objectives have been met and signed off by the stakeholders. 

Using these criteria, let's examine the assignment from the VP of marketing to determine 
if it is a project: 

• Is it unique? Yes, because the kiosks don't exist in the local grocery stores. This is a 
new way of offering the company's services to its customer base. While the service 
the company is offering isn't new, the way it is presenting its services is. 

• Does the product have a limited timeframe? Yes, the start date of this project is today, 
and the end date is the end of next year. It is a temporary endeavor. 



Page 34 of 135 



• Is there a way to determine when the project is completed? Yes, the kiosks will be 
installed and the services will be offered from them. Once all the kiosks are intact and 
operating, the project will come to a close. 

• Is there a way to determine stakeholder satisfaction? Yes, the expectations of the 
stakeholders will be documented in the form of requirements during the planning 
processes. These requirements will be compared to the finished product to determine 
if it meets the expectations of the stakeholder. 

If the answer is yes to all these questions, then "Houston, we have a project". 



Page 35 of 135 



Chapter 5: What is Project Management? 



You've determined that you have a project. What now? The notes you scribbled down on 
the back of the napkin at lunch are a start, but not exactly good project management practice. 
Too often, organizations follow Nike's advice when it comes to managing projects when they 
"just do it." An assignment is made and the project team members jump directly into the 
development of the product or service requested. In the end the delivered product doesn't meet 
the expectations of the customer. Unfortunately, many projects follow this poorly constructed 
path and that is a primary contributor to why a large percentage of projects don't meet their 
original objectives defined by performance, schedule, and budget. 

In the United States, more than $250 billion dollars is spent each year on IT application 
development in approximately 175,000 projects. The Standish Group (a Boston-based leader in 
project and value performance research) released the summary version of their 2009 CHAOS 
Report that tracks project failure rates across a broad range of companies and industries (Figure 
5.1). 



Challenged = late, 
overbudget, and/or 
vvithless than the required 
features and functions 




Successful - delivered on time, 
on budget, with required 
features and functions 



Failed = cancelled prior 
to completion or 
delivered and never used 



Figure 5.1: Summary of 2009 Standish Group CHAOS report. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 

Jim Johnson, chairman of the Standish Group has stated that "this year's results show a 
marked decrease in project success rates, with 32% of all projects succeeding which are 
delivered on time, on budget, with required features and functions, 44% were challenged which 
are late, over budget, and/or with less than the required features and functions and 24% failed 
which are cancelled prior to completion or delivered and never used." 

When are companies going to stop wasting billions of dollars on failed projects? The vast 
majority of this waste is completely avoidable; simply get the right business needs 
(requirements) understood early in the process and ensure that project management techniques 
are applied and followed and the project activities are monitored. 

Applying good project management discipline is the way to help reduce the risks. Having 
good project management skills does not completely eliminate problems, risks, or surprises. The 



value of good project management is that you have standard processes in place to deal with all 
contingencies. 

Project Management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques applied 
to project activities in order to meet the project requirements. Project management is a process 
that includes planning, putting the project plan into action, and measuring progress and 
performance. 

Managing a project includes identifying your project's requirements; writing down what 
everyone needs from the project. What are the objectives for your project? When everyone 
understands the goal, it's much easier to keep them all on the right path. Make sure you set goals 
that everyone agrees on to avoid team conflicts later on. Understanding and addressing the needs 
of everyone affected by the project means the end result of your project is far more likely to 
satisfy your stakeholders, and last but not least, as project manager you will also be balancing the 
many competing project constraints. 

On any project, you will have a number of competing project constraints that are 
competing for your attention. They are cost, scope, quality, risk, resources and time. 



• 



Cost is budget approved for the project including all necessary expenses needed to 
deliver the project. Within organizations, project managers have to balance between 
not running out of money and not under spending because many projects receive 
funds or grants that have contract clauses with an "use it or lose it" approach to 
project funds. Poorly executed budget plans can result in a last minute rush to spend 
the allocated funds. For virtually all projects, cost is ultimately a limiting constraint; 
few projects can go over budget without eventually requiring a corrective action. 

• Scope is what the project is trying to achieve. It entails all the work involved in 
delivering the project outcomes and the processes used to produce them. It is the 
reason and the purpose of the project. 

• Quality is the standards and criteria to which the project's products must be delivered 
for them to perform effectively. First, the product must perform to provide the 
functionality expected, and to solve the problem, and deliver the benefit and value 
expected of it. It must also meet other performance requirements, or service levels, 
such as availability, reliability and maintainability, and have acceptable finish and 
polish. Quality on a project is controlled through quality assurance (QA) that is the 
process of evaluating overall project's performance on a regular basis to provide 
confidence that the project will satisfy the relevant quality standards. 

• Risk is defined by potential external events that will have a negative impact on your 
project if they occur. Risk refers to the combination of the probability the event will 
occur and the impact on the project if the event occurs. If the combination of the 
probability of the occurrence and the impact to the project is too high, you should 
identify the potential event as a risk and put a proactive plan in place to manage the 
risk. 

Page 37 of 135 



• Resources are required to carry out the project tasks. They can be people, equipment, 
facilities, funding, or anything else capable of definition (usually other than labor) 
required for the completion of a project activity. 

• Time is defined as the time to complete the project. Time is often the most frequent 
project oversight in developing projects. This is reflected in missed deadlines and 
incomplete deliverables. Proper control of the schedule requires the careful 
identification of tasks to be performed, an accurate estimation of their durations, the 
sequence in which they are going to be done, and how people and other resources are 
allocated. Any schedule should take into account vacations and holidays. 

You may have heard of the term "Triple Constraint" which traditionally only consisted of 
Time, Cost & Scope. These are the primary competing project constraints that you have to be 
aware of most. The triple constraint is illustrated in the form of a triangle to visualize the project 
work and to see the relationship between the scope/quality, schedule/time, and cost/resource 
(Figure 5.2). 





• • ■ 



uality 



Figure 5.2: A schematic of the triple constraint triangle. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 

In this triangle, each side represents one of the constraints (or related constraints) wherein 
any changes to any one side cause a change in the other sides. The best projects have a perfectly 
balanced triangle. Maintaining this balance is difficult because projects are prone to change. For 
example, if scope increases, cost and time may increase disproportionately. Alternatively, if the 
amount of money you have for your project decreases, you may be able to do as much, but your 
time may increase. 

Your project may have additional constraints that you are facing, and as the project 
manager you have to balance the needs of these constraints against the needs of the stakeholders 
and against your project goals. For instance, if your sponsor wants to add functionality to the 
original scope you will very likely need more money to finish the project or if they cut the 
budget you have to reduce the quality of your scope and if you don't get the appropriate 

Page 38 of 135 



resources to work on your project tasks you will have to extend your schedule because the 
resources you have take much longer to finish the work. 

You get the idea; they are all dependent on each other. Think of all of these constraints as 
the classic carnival game of Whac-a-mole (Figure 5.3). Each time you try to push one mole back 
in the hole, another one pops out. The best advice is to rely on your project team to keep these 
moles in place. 




Figure 5.3: Go to www.dorneypark.com/public/online fun/mole. cfm to play Whac-a-mole. 

Photo from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 

Here is an example of a project that cut quality because the project costs were fixed. The 
P-36 oil platform (Figure 5.4) was the largest footing production platform in the world capable of 
processing 180,000 barrels of oil per day and 5.2 million cubic meters of gas per day. Located in 
the Roncador Field, Campos Basin, Brazil the P-36 was operated by Petrobras. 




Figure 5.4.: The Petrobras P-36 oil platform. 

Photo from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 

In March 2001, the P-36 was producing around 84,000 barrels of oil and 1.3 million 
cubic meters of gas per day when it became destabilized by two explosions and subsequently 
sank in 3900 feet of water with 1650 short tons of crude oil remaining on board, killing 1 1 
people. The sinking is attributed to a complete failure in quality assurance, and pressure for 



Page 39 of 135 



increased production led to corners being cut on safety procedures. It is listed as one of the most 
expensive accidents with a price tag of $515,000,000. 

The following quote is from a Petrobras executive, citing the benefits of cutting quality 
assurance and inspection costs on the project, while the accompanying pictures are the result of 
this proud achievement in project management by Petrobras. The quotation is provided one 
sentence at a time and compared with pictures of the actual outcome 




Figure 5.5: "Petrobras has established new global benchmarks for the generation of exceptional 
shareholder wealth through an aggressive and innovative program of cost cutting on its P36 

production facility." 

Photo from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



Page 40 of 135 




Figure 5.6: "Conventional constraints have been successfully challenged and replaced with new 
paradigms appropriate to the globalized corporate market place." 

Photo from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 




Figure 5.7: "Through an integrated network of facilitated workshops, the project successfully 

rejected the established constricting and negative influences of prescriptive engineering, onerous 

quality requirements, and outdated concepts of inspection and client control." 

Photo from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



Page 41 of 135 




Figure 5.8: "Elimination of these unnecessary straitjackets has empowered the project's suppliers 
and contractors to propose highly economical solutions, with the win-win bonus of enhanced 

profitability margins for themselves." 

Photo from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 




Figure 5.9: "The P36 platform shows the shape of things to come in the unregulated global 

market economy of the 21st century." 

Photo from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



The dynamic trade-offs between the project constraint values have been humorously and 
accurately described in Figure 5.10. 



Page 42 of 135 



"We can do GOOD, QUICK and CHEAP work. 

You can have any two but not all three. 

1. GOOD QUICK work won't be CHEAP. 

2. GOOD CHEAP work won't be QUICK. 

3. QUICK CHEAP work won't be GOOD." 



Figure 5.10: A sign seen at an automotive repair shop. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



Page 43 of 135 



Chapter 6: Project Management Areas of Expertise 



In order for you as the project manager to manage the competing project constraints and 
to manage the project as a whole, there are some areas of expertise that you should bring onto the 
project team (Figure 6.1). They are the application area of knowledge; standards and regulations 
in your industry, understanding the project environment, and you must have general management 
knowledge and interpersonal skills. It should be noted that the industry expertise is not in a 
certain field but the expertise in order to run the project. So while knowledge of the type of 
industry is important you will have a project team supporting you in this endeavor. For example, 
if you are managing a project that is building an oil platform, you would not be expected to have 
a detailed understanding of the engineering since your team will have mechanical and civil 
engineers who will provide the appropriate expertise, however, it would definitely help if you 
understand this type of work. 

Let's take a look at each of these areas in more detail. 



6.1 Application knowledge; standards & regulations 

By standards, we mean guidelines or preferred approaches that are not necessarily 
mandatory. In contrast, when referring to regulations we mean mandatory rules that must be 
followed such as Government imposed requirements through laws. It should go without saying 
that as a professional, you're required to follow all applicable laws and rules that apply to your 
industry, organization, or project. Every industry has standards and regulations. Knowing which 
ones affect your project before you begin work will not only help the project to unfold smoothly, 
but will also allow for effective risk analysis. 



Areas of Expertise 



Application knowledge, standards & regulations 



Understanding the project environment 



Management knowledge & skills 



Interpersonal skills 



Figure 6.1: Areas of expertise that a project manager should bring to the project team. 

Table from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



Page 44 of 135 



Some projects require specific skills in certain application areas. Application areas are 
made up of categories of projects that have common elements. They can be defined by: industry 
group (pharmaceutical, financial, etc), by department (accounting, marketing, legal, etc), by 
technical (software development, engineering, etc), or management (procurement, research, & 
development, etc) specialties. These application areas are usually concerned with disciplines, 
regulations and the specific needs of the project, the customer, or the industry. For example, 
most government agencies have specific procurement rules that apply to their projects that 
wouldn't be applicable in the construction industry. The pharmaceutical industry is interested in 
regulations set forth by the Food and Drug Administration, whereas the automotive industry has 
little or no concern for either of these types of regulations. You need to stay up-to-date regarding 
your industry so that you can apply your knowledge effectively. Today's fast paced advances can 
leave you behind fairly quickly if you don't stay abreast on current trends. 

Having some level of experience in the application area you're working in will give you 
an advantage when it comes to project management. While you can call in experts who have the 
application area knowledge, it doesn't hurt for you to understand the specific aspects of the 
application areas of your project. 

6.2 Understanding the Project Environment 

There are many factors that need to be understood within your project environment 
(Figure 6.2). At one level you need to understand your project environment by thinking in terms 
of the cultural and the social environment. In this region we think of people, demographics and 
education. The international and political environment is where you need to understand about 
different countries cultural influences. Then we move on to the physical environment; here we 
think about time zones, think about different countries and how differently your project will be 
executed whether it is just in your country or whether you have an international project team that 
is distributed throughout the world in five different countries. 



Project Environment 


Cultural 


Social 


International 


Political 


Physical 



Figure 6.2: The important factors to consider within the project environment. 

Table from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



Of all the factors the physical ones are the easiest to understand, and it is the cultural and 
international factors that are often misunderstood or ignored. How we deal with clients, 
customers, or project members from other countries can be critical to the success of the project. 
For example, the culture of the United States values accomplishments and individualism. 

Page 45 of 135 



Americans tend to be informal and call each other by first names, even if having just met. 
Europeans tend to be more formal, using surnames instead of first names in a business setting, 
even if they know each other well. In addition, their communication style is more formal than in 
the US, and while they tend to value individualism, they also value history, hierarchy, and 
loyalty. The Japanese, on the other hand, tend to communicate indirectly and consider 
themselves part of a group, not as individuals. The Japanese value hard work and success, as 
most of us do. 

How a product is received can be very dependent on the international cultural differences. 
For example, in the nineties, when many large American and European telecommunications 
companies were cultivating new markets in Asia, their customer's cultural differences often 
produced unexpected situations. Western companies planned their telephone systems to work the 
same way in Asia as they did in Europe and America. But the protocol of conversation was 
different. Call-waiting, a popular feature in the West, is considered impolite in some parts of 
Asia. This cultural blunder could have been avoided had the team captured the project 
environment requirements and involved the customer. 

It is often the simplest things that can cause trouble since unsurprisingly in different 
countries people do things differently. One of the most notorious examples of this is also one of 
the most simple: date formats. What day and month is 2/8/2009? Of course it depends where you 
come from; in North America it is February 8th while in Europe (and much of the rest of the 
world) it is 2nd August. Clearly, when schedules and deadlines are being defined it is important 
that everyone is clear on the format used. 

The diversity of practices and cultures and its impact on products in general and on 
software in particular, goes well beyond the date issue. You may be managing a project to create 
a new website for a company that sells products worldwide. There are language and presentation 
style issues to take into consideration; converting the site into different languages isn't enough. It 
is obvious to ensure that the translation is correct, however, the presentation layer will have its 
own set of requirements for different cultures. The left side of a web site may be the first focus of 
attention for an American; the right side would be the initial focus for anyone from the Middle 
East, as both Arabic and Hebrew are written from right to left. Colors also have different 
meanings in different cultures. White, which is a sign of purity in America (e.g., a bride's 
wedding dress), and thus would be a favored background color in North America, signifies death 
in Japan (e.g., a burial shroud). Table 6.1 summarizes different meanings of common colors. 



Page 46 of 135 



Color 


United States 


China 


Japan 


Egypt 


France 


Red 


Danger, stop 


Happiness 


Anger, danger 


Death 


Aristocracy 


Blue 


Sadness, 
melancholy 


Heavens, 
clouds 


Villainy 


Virtue, faith, 
truth 


Freedom, 
peace 


Green 


Novice, ap- 
prentice 


Ming dynasty, 
heavens 


Future, youth, 
energy 


Fertility, 
strength 


Criminality 


Yellow 


Cowardice 


Birth, wealth 


Grace, nobility 


Happiness, 
prosperity 


Temporary 


White 


Purity 


Death, purity 


Death 


Joy 


Neutrality 



Table 6.1: The meaning of colors in various cultures Adapted from P. Russo and S. Boor, How 

Fluent is Your Interface? Designing for International Users, Proceedings of the INTERACT '93 

and CHI '93, Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. (1993). 

Table from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



Project managers in multicultural projects must appreciate the culture dimensions and try 
to learn relevant customs, courtesies, and business protocols before taking responsibility for 
managing an international project. A project manager must take into consideration these various 
cultural influences and how they may affect the project's completion, schedule, scope and cost. 

6.3 Management Knowledge and Skills 



As the project manager you have to rely on your project management knowledge and 
your general management skills. In this area we are thinking of items like your ability to plan the 
project, to execute the project properly and of course to control the project and bring it to a 
successful conclusion with the ability to guide the project team while achieving project 
objectives and balancing the project constraints. 

There is more to project management than just getting the work done. Inherent to the 
process of project management are the general management skills that allow the project manager 
to complete the project with some level of efficiency and control. In some respects, managing a 
project is similar to running a business: there are risk and rewards, finance and accounting 
activities, human resource issues, time management, stress management, and a purpose for the 
project to exist. General management skills are needed in just about every project. 



Page 47 of 135 



6.4 Interpersonal Skills 



Last but not least you also have to bring the ability onto the project to manage personal 
relationships as well as dealing with issues as they arise. Here were talking about your 
interpersonal skills as shown in Figure 6.3. 

6.4.1 Communication 



Project managers spend 90% of their time communicating. Therefore they must be good 
communicators, promoting clear unambiguous exchange of information. As a project manager, it 
is your job to keep a number of people well informed. It is essential that your project staff know 
what is expected of them: what they have to do, when they have to do it, and what budget and 
time constraints and quality specification they are working towards. If project staff does not 
know what their tasks are, or how to accomplish them, then the entire project will grind to a halt. 
If you do not know what the project staff is (or often is not) doing then you will be unable to 
monitor project progress. Finally, if you are uncertain of what the customer expects of you, then 
the project will not even get off the ground. Project communication can thus be summed up as 
who needs what information and when. 



Interpersonal Skills 


Communication 


Influence 


Leadership 


Motivation 


Negotiation 


Problem solving 



Figure 6.3: Interpersonal skills required of a project manager. 

Table from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



All projects require sound communication plans, but not all projects will have the same 
types of communication or the same methods for distributing the information. For example, will 
information be distributed via mail or e-mail, is there a shared web site, or are face-to-face 
meetings required? The communication management plan documents how the communication 
needs of the stakeholders will be met, including the types of information that will be 
communicated, who will communicate it, who receives the communication, the methods used to 
communicate, the timing and frequency, the method for updating the plan as the project 
progresses, escalation process, and a glossary of common terms. 

6.4.2 Influence 



Project management is about getting things done. Every organization is different in its 
policies, modes of operations and underlying culture. There are political alliances, differing 
motivations, confecting interest, and power struggles within every organization. A project 
manager must understand all of the unspoken influences at work within an organization. 



Page 48 of 135 



6.4.3 Leadership 



Leadership is the ability to motivate and inspire individuals to work towards expected 
results. Leaders inspire vision and rally people around common goals. A good project manager 
can motivate and inspire the project team to see the vision and value of the project. The project 
manager as a leader can inspire the project team to find a solution to overcome the perceived 
obstacles to get the work done. 

6.4.4 Motivation 



Motivation helps people work more efficiently and produce better results. Motivation is a 
constant process that the project manager must have to help the team move towards completion 
with passion and a profound reason to complete the work. Motivating the team is accomplished 
by using a variety of team building techniques and exercises. Team building is simply getting a 
diverse group of people to work together in the most efficient and effective manner possible. 
This may involve management events as well as individual actions designed to improve team 
performance. 

Recognition and rewards are an important part of team motivations. They are formal 
ways of recognizing and promoting desirable behavior and are most effective when carried out 
by the management team and the project manager. Consider individual preferences and cultural 
differences when using rewards and recognition. Some people don't like to be recognized in front 
of a group; others thrive on it. 

6.4.5 Negotiation 



Project managers must negotiate for the good of the project. In any project, the project 
manager, the project sponsor, and the project team will have to negotiate with stakeholders, 
vendors, and customers to reach a level of agreement acceptable to all parties involved in the 
negotiation process. 

6.4.6 Problem Solving 



Problem solving is the ability to understand the heart of a problem, look for a viable 
solution, and then make a decision to implement that solution. The premise for problem solving 
is problem definition. Problem definition is the ability to understand the cause and effect of the 
problem; this centers on root cause analysis. If a project manager treats only the symptoms of a 
problem rather than its cause, the symptoms will perpetuate and continue through the project life. 
Even worse treating a symptom may result in a greater problem. For example, increasing the 
ampere rating of a fuse in your car because the old one keeps blowing does not solve the problem 
of an electrical short that could result in a free. Root cause analysis looks beyond the immediate 
symptoms to the cause of the symptoms, which then affords opportunities for solutions. Once the 
root of a problem has been identified, a decision must be made to effectively address the 
problem. 

Solutions can be presented from vendors, the project team, the project manager or various 
stakeholders. A viable solution focuses on more than just the problem; it looks at the cause and 
effect of the solution itself. In addition, a timely decision is needed or the window of opportunity 
may pass and then a new decision will be needed to address the problem. As in most cases, the 
worst thing you can do is nothing. 

Page 49 of 135 



All of these interpersonal skills will be used in all areas of project management. Start 
practicing now because it's guaranteed that you'll need these skills on your next project. 



Page 50 of 135 



Chapter 7: The Project Life Cycle 

The project manager and project team have one shared goal: to carry out the work of the 
project for the purpose of meeting the project's objectives. Every project has beginnings, a 
middle period during which activities move the project toward completion, and an ending (either 
successful or unsuccessful). A standard project typically has the following four major phases 
(each with its own agenda of tasks and issues): initiation, planning, implementation, and closure. 
Taken together, these phases represent the path a project takes from the beginning to its end and 
are generally referred to as the project life cycle . 

7.1 Initiation Phase 



During the first of these phases, the initiation phase, the project objective or need is 
identified; this can be a business problem or opportunity. An appropriate response to the need is 
documented in a business case with recommended solution options. A feasibility study is 
conducted to investigate whether each option addresses the project objective and a final 
recommended solution is determined. Issues of feasibility ("can we do the project?") and 
justification ("should we do the project?") are addressed. 

Once the recommended solution is approved, a project is initiated to deliver the approved 
solution and a project manager is appointed. The major deliverables and the participating work 
groups are identified and the project team begins to take shape. Approval is then sought by the 
project manager to move on the detailed planning phase. 

7.2 Planning Phase 



The next phase, the planning phase, is where the project solution is further developed in 
as much detail as possible and you plan the steps necessary to meet the project's objective. In this 
step, the team identifies all of the work to be done. The project's tasks and resource requirements 
are identified, along with the strategy for producing them. This is also referred to as scope 
management. A project plan is created outlining the activities, tasks, dependencies and 
timeframes. The project manager coordinates the preparation of a project budget; by providing 
cost estimates for the labor, equipment and materials costs. The budget is used to monitor and 
control cost expenditures during project implementation. 

Once the project team has identified the work, prepared the schedule and estimated the 
costs, the three fundamental components of the planning process are complete. This is an 
excellent time to identify and try to deal with anything that might pose a threat to the successful 
completion of the project. This is called risk management. In risk management, "high-threat" 
potential problems are identified along with the action that is to be taken on each high threat 
potential problem, either to reduce the probability that the problem will occur or to reduce the 
impact on the project if it does occur. This is also a good time to identify all project stakeholders, 
and to establish a communication plan describing the information needed and the delivery 
method to be used to keep the stakeholders informed. 

Finally, you will want to document a quality plan; providing quality targets, assurance, 
and control measures along with an acceptance plan; listing the criteria to be met to gain 

Page 51 of 135 



customer acceptance. At this point, the project would have been planned in detail and is ready to 
be executed. 

7.3 Implementation Phase 



During the third phase, the implementation phase, the project plan is put into motion and 
performs the work of the project. It is important to maintain control and communicate as needed 
during implementation. Progress is continuously monitored and appropriate adjustments are 
made and recorded as variances from the original plan. In any project a project manager will 
spend most of their time in this step. During project implementation, people are carrying out the 
tasks and progress information is being reported through regular team meetings. The project 
manager uses this information to maintain control over the direction of the project by measuring 
the performance of the project activities comparing the results with the project plan and takes 
corrective action as needed. The first course of action should always be to bring the project back 
on course, i.e., to return it to the original plan. If that cannot happen, the team should record 
variations from the original plan and record and publish modifications to the plan. Throughout 
this step, project sponsors and other key stakeholders should be kept informed of project status 
according to the agreed upon frequency and format. The plan should be updated and published 
on a regular basis. 

Status reports should always emphasize the anticipated end point in terms of cost, 
schedule and quality of deliverables. Each project deliverable produced should be reviewed for 
quality and measured against the acceptance criteria. Once all of the deliverables have been 
produced and the customer has accepted the final solution, the project is ready for closure. 

7.4 Closing phase 



During the final closure, or completion phase, the emphasis is on releasing the final 
deliverables to the customer, handing over project documentation to the business, terminating 
supplier contracts, releasing project resources and communicating the closure of the project to all 
stakeholders. The last remaining step is to conduct lessons learned studies; to examine what went 
well and what didn't. Through this type of analysis the wisdom of experience is transferred back 
to the project organization, which will help future project teams. 



Page 52 of 135 




PART II - PROJECT STRATEGY 




Waxing Moon Copyright © NASA 

http://www.flickr.com/photos/gsfc/583703 1 188/ 



Chapter 8: Project Stakeholders 



A project is successful when it achieves its objectives and meets or exceeds the 
expectations of the stakeholders. But who are the stakeholders? Stakeholders are individuals who 
either care about or have a vested interest in your project. They are the people who are actively 
involved with the work of the project or have something to either gain or lose as a result of the 
project. When you manage a project to add lanes to a highway, motorists are stakeholders who 
are positively affected. However, you negatively affect residents who live near the highway 
during your project (with construction noise) and after your project with far reaching 
implications (increased traffic noise and pollution). 

NOTE: Key stakeholders can make or break the success of a project. Even if all the 
deliverables are met and the objectives are satisfied, if your key stakeholders aren't happy, 
nobody's happy. 

The project sponsor, generally an executive in the organization with the authority to 
assign resources and enforce decisions regarding the project, is a stakeholder. The customer, 
subcontractors, suppliers and sometimes even the Government are stakeholders. The project 
manager, project team members and the managers from other departments in the organization are 
stakeholders as well. It's important to identify all the stakeholders in your project upfront. 
Leaving out important stakeholders or their department's function and not discovering the error 
until well into the project could be a project killer. 

Figure 8.1 shows a sample of the project environment featuring the different kinds of 
stakeholders involved on a typical project. A study of this diagram confronts us with a couple of 
interesting facts. 

First, the number of stakeholders that project managers must deal with assures that they 
will have a complex job guiding their project through the lifecycle. Problems with any of these 
members can derail the project. 

The diagram also shows that project managers have to deal with people external to the 
organization as well as the internal environment, certainly more complex than what a manager in 
an internal environment faces. For example, suppliers who are late in delivering crucial parts 
may blow the project schedule. To compound the problem, project managers generally have little 
or no direct control over any of these individuals. 



Government 



External 
Customers 



Top Management 

Project Team Members 

Your Manager 

Peers 

Resource Manager 

Internal Customers 



Contractors & 
Subcontractors 



Suppliers 



Figure 8.1: Project stakeholders. 



Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 

Let's take a look at these stakeholders and their relationships to the project manager. 

8.1 Top Management 

Top management may include the president of the company, vice presidents, directors, 
division managers, the corporate operating committee, and others. These people direct the 
strategy and development of the organization. 

On the plus side, you are more likely to have top management support, which means it 
will be easier to recruit the best staff to carry out the project, and to acquire needed material and 
resources; also visibility can enhance a PM's professional standing in the company. 

On the minus side, failure can be quite dramatic and visible to all, and if the project is 
large and expensive (most are), the cost of failure will be more substantial than for a smaller less 
visible project. 

Some suggestions in dealing with top management are: 

• Develop in-depth plans and major milestones that must be approved by top 
management during the planning and design phases of the project. 

• Ask top management associated with your project for their information reporting 
needs and frequency. 

• Develop a status reporting methodology to be distributed on a scheduled basis. 

• Keep them informed of project risks and potential impacts at all times. 



8.2 The Project Team 



The project team is those people dedicated to the project or borrowed on a part-time 
basis. As project manager you need to provide leadership, direction, and above all, the support to 
team members as they go about accomplishing their tasks. Working closely with the team to 
solve problems can help you learn from the team and build rapport. Showing your support for the 
project team and for each member will help you get their support and cooperation. 

Some difficulties in dealing with project team members include: 

• Because project team members are borrowed and they don't report to you, their 
priorities may be elsewhere. 

• They may be juggling many projects as well as their full time job and have difficulty 
meeting any deadline. 

• Personality conflicts may arise. These may be caused by differences in social style or 
values or they may be the result of some bad experience when people worked 
together in the past. 

• You may find out about missed deadlines when it is too late to recover. 



Managing project team members requires interpersonal skills. Here are some suggestions 
that can help: 

• Involve team members in project planning. 

• Arrange to meet privately and informally with each team member at several points in 
the project, perhaps for lunch or coffee. 

• Be available to hear team members' concerns at any time. 

• Encourage team members to pitch in and help others when needed. 

• Complete a project performance review for team members. 

8.3 Your Manager 

Typically the boss decides what our assignment is and who can work with us on our 
projects. Keeping your manager informed will help ensure that you get the necessary resources 
to complete your project. 

• If things go wrong on a project, it is nice to have an understanding and supportive 
boss to go to bat for us if necessary. By supporting your manager, you will find your 
manager will support you more often. 



• Find out exactly how your performance will be measured. 

• When unclear about directions, ask for clarification. 

• Develop a reporting schedule that is acceptable to your boss. 

• Communicate frequently. 



8.4 Peers 



Peers are people on the project team or not, who are at the same level in the organization 
as you. These people will, in fact, also have a vested interest in the product. However, they will 
have neither the leadership responsibilities nor the accountability for the success or failure of the 
project that you have. 

Your relationship with peers can be impeded by: 

• Inadequate control over peers. 

• Political maneuvering or sabotage. 

• Personality conflicts or technical conflicts. 

• Envy because your peer may have wanted to lead the project. 

• Conflicting instructions from your manager and your peer's manager. 

Peer support is essential. Because most of us serve our self-interest first, use some 
investigating, selling, influencing and politicking skills here. To ensure you have cooperation 
and support from your peers: 

Get the support of your project sponsor or top management to empower you as the 
project manager with as much authority as possible. It's important that the sponsor makes it clear 
to the other team members that their cooperation on project activities is expected. 



• 



Confront your peer if you notice a behavior that seems dysfunctional, such as bad- 
mouthing the project. 

• Be explicit in asking for full support from your peers. Arrange for frequent review 
meetings. 

• Establish goals and standards of performance for all team members. 

8.5 Resource Managers 

Because project managers are in the position of borrowing resources, other managers 
control their resources. So their relationships with people are especially important. If their 



relationship is good, they may be able to consistently acquire the best staff and the best 
equipment for their projects. If relations aren't so good, they may find themselves not able to get 
good people or equipment needed on the project. 

8.6 Internal Customer 



Internal customers are individuals within the organization who have projects that meet 
the needs of internal demands. The customer holds the power to accept or reject your work. Early 
in the relationship, the project manager will need to negotiate, clarify, and document project 
specifications and deliverables. After the project begins, the project manager must stay tuned in 
to the customer's concerns and issues and keep the customer informed. 

Common stumbling blocks when dealing with internal customers include: 

• A lack of clarity about precisely what is wanted by the customer. 

• A lack of documentation for what is wanted. 

• A lack of knowledge of the customer's organization and operating characteristics. 

• Unrealistic deadlines, budgets, or specifications. 

• Hesitancy to sign off on the project or accept responsibility for decisions. 

• Changes in project scope. 

To meet the needs of the customer, client or owner, be sure to do the following: 

• Learn the client organization's buzzwords, culture, and business. 

• Clarify all project requirements and specifications in a written agreement. 

• Specify a change procedure. 

• Establish the project manager as the focal point of communications in the project 
organization. 

8.7 External customer 



External customers are the customers when projects could be marketed to outside 
customers. In the case of Ford Motor Company for example, the external customers would be the 
buyers of the automobiles. Also if you are managing a project at your company for Ford Motor 
Company, they will be your external customer. 

8.8 Government 



Project managers working in certain heavily regulated environment (e.g., pharmaceutical, 



banking, military industries, etc.) will have to deal with government regulators and departments. 
These can include all or some levels from city, through county, state, and federal, to 
international. 

8.9 Contractors, subcontractors, and suppliers 



There are times when organizations don't have the expertise in-house or available 
resources, and work is farmed out to contractors or subcontractors. This can be a construction 
management foreman, network consultant, electrician, carpenter, architect, and in general anyone 
who is not an employee. Managing contractors or suppliers requires many of the skills needed to 
manage full-time project team members. 

Any number of problems can arise with contractors or subcontractors: 

• Quality of the work. 

• Cost overruns 

• Schedule slippage 

Many projects depend on goods provided by outside suppliers. This is true for example of 
construction projects where lumber, nails, brick and mortar come from outside suppliers. If the 
supplied goods are delivered late or in short supply or of poor quality or if the price is greater 
than originally quoted, the project may suffer. 

Depending on the project, managing relationships can consume more than half of the 
project manager's time. It is not purely intuitive; it involves a sophisticated skill set that includes 
managing conflicts, negotiating, and other interpersonal skills. 



Chapter 9: The Politics of Projects 

Many times, project stakeholders have conflicting interests. It's the project manager's 
responsibility to understand these conflicts and try to resolve them. It's also the project manger's 
responsibility to manage stakeholder expectations. Be certain to identify and meet with all key 
stakeholders early in the project to understand all their needs and constraints. 

Project managers are somewhat like politicians. Typically, they are not inherently powerful, 
or capable of imposing their will directly to co-workers, subcontractors and suppliers. Like 
politicians, if they are to get their way, they have to exercise influence effectively over others. 
On projects, project managers have direct control over very few things; therefore their ability to 
influence others - to be a good politician - may be very important 

Here are a few steps a good project politician should follow. However, a good rule is that 
when in doubt, stakeholder conflicts should always be resolved in favor of the customer. 

9.1 Assess the environment 



Identify all the relevant stakeholders. Because any of these stakeholders could derail the project, 
we need to consider their particular interest in the project. 

• Once all relevant stakeholders are identified, we try to determine where the power 
lies. 

• In the vast cast of characters we confront, who counts most? 

• Whose actions will have the greatest impact? 

9.2 Identify goals 



After determining who the stakeholders are, we should identify their goals. 

• What is it that drives them? 

• What is each after? 

• We should also be aware of hidden agendas or goals that are not openly articulated. 

• We need to pay special attention to the goals of the stakeholders who hold the power. 
9.3 Define the problem 

• The facts that constitute the problem should be isolated and closely examined. 



The question "What is the real situation?" should be raised over and over. 



Chapter 10: Project Initiation 

The project initiation phase is the first phase within the project management life cycle, as 
it involves starting up a new project. Within the initiation phase, the business problem or 
opportunity is identified, a solution is defined, a project is formed, and a project team is 
appointed to build and deliver the solution to the customer. A business case is created to define 
the problem or opportunity in detail and identify a preferred solution for implementation. The 
business case includes: 



• 



A detailed description of the problem or opportunity 

• A list of the alternative solutions available 

• An analysis of the business benefits, costs, risks and issues 

• A description of the preferred solution 

• A summarized plan for implementation 

The project sponsor then approves the business case, and the required funding is allocated 
to proceed with a feasibility study. It is up to the project sponsor to determine if the project is 
worth undertaking and whether the project will be profitable to the organization. The completion 
and approval of the feasibility study triggers the beginning of the planning phase. The feasibility 
study may also show that the project is not worth pursuing and the project is terminated; thus the 
next phase never begins. 

All projects are created for a reason. Someone identifies a need or an opportunity and 
devises a project to address that need. How well the project ultimately addresses that need 
defines the project's success or failure. 

The success of your project depends on the clarity and accuracy of your business case 
and whether people believe they can achieve it. Whenever you consider past experience, your 
business case is more realistic; and whenever you involve people in the business case's 
development, you encourage their commitment to achieving it. 

Often the pressure to get results encourages people to go right into identifying possible 
solutions without fully understanding the need; what the project is trying to accomplish. This 
strategy can create a lot of immediate activity but it also creates significant chances for waste and 
mistakes if the wrong need is addressed. One of the best ways to gain approval for a project is to 
clearly identify the project's objectives and describe the need or opportunity for which the 
project will provide a solution. 

For most of us, being misunderstood is a common occurrence, something that happens on 
a daily basis. At the restaurant the waiter brings us our dinner and we note that the baked potato 
is filled with sour cream, even though we expressly requested "no sour cream". Projects are 
filled with misunderstandings between customers and project staff. What the customer orders (or 
more accurately what they think they order) is often not what they get. The cliche is "I know 



that's what I said, but it's not what I meant" The cartoon demonstrates the importance of 
establishing clear objectives. 

The need for establishing clear project objectives cannot be overstated. An objective or 
goal lacks clarity if, when shown to five people, it is interpreted in multiple ways. Ideally, if an 
objective is clear, you can show it to five people who, after reviewing it, hold a single view about 
its meaning. The best way to make an objective clear is to state it such a way that it can be 
verified. Building in measures can do this. It is important to provide quantifiable definitions to 
qualitative terms. 

For example, an objective of the team principle (project manager) of a Formula 1 racing 
team may be that their star driver, "finish the lap as fast as possible." That objective is filled with 
ambiguity. 

How fast is "fast as possible?" Does that mean the fastest lap time (the time to complete 
one lap) or does it mean the fastest speed as the car crosses the start/finish line (that is at the 
finish of the lap)? 

By when should the driver be able to achieve the objective? It is no use having the fastest 
lap after the race has finished, and equally the fastest lap does not count for qualifying, and 
therefore starting position, if it is performed during a practice session. 

The ambiguity of this objective can be seen from the following example. Ferrari's 
Michael Schumacher achieved the race lap record at the Circuit de Monaco of 1 min 14.439 sec 
in 2004 (Figure 10.2). However, he achieved this on lap 23 of the race, but crashed on lap 45 of a 
77 lap race So while he achieved a fastest lap and therefore met the specific project goal of 
"finish the lap as fast as possible", it did not result in winning the race, clearly a different project 
goal. In contrast, the fastest qualifying time at the same event was by Renault's Jarno Trulli (1 
min 13.985 sec), which gained him pole position for the race, in which he went on to win (Figure 
10.3). In his case he also achieved the specific project goal of "finish the lap as fast as possible", 
but also the larger goal of winning the race. 




Figure 10.2: Despite achieving the project goal of the "finish the lap as fast as possible" Ferrari's 
Michael Schumacher crashed 21 laps later and did not finish the race. 

Photo from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 




Figure 10.3: Renault's Jarno Trulli celebrating his win at the 2004 Monaco Grand Prix. 

Photo from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



The objective can be strengthened considerably if it is stated as follows: "To be able to 
finish the 3.340 km lap at the Circuit de Monaco at the Monaco Grand Prix in 1 min 14.902 sec 
or less, during qualifying on 23th May, 2009. This was the project objective achieved by Brawn 
GP's Jenson Button (Figure 10.4). 




Figure 10.4..: Jenson Button took his Brawn GP car to pole position at the Monaco Grand Prix 
with a lap time of 1 min 14.902 sec. He also went on to with the race, even though he did not 

achieve that lap time during the race. 

Photo from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



There is still some ambiguity in this objective; for example, it assumes the star driver will 
be driving the team's race car and not a rental car from Hertz. However, it clarifies the team 
principal's intent quite nicely. It should be noted that a clear goal is not enough. It must also be 
achievable. The team principal's goal becomes unachievable, for example, if he changes it to 



require his star driver finish the 3.340 km lap in 30 seconds or less. 

To ensure the project's objectives are achievable and realistic, they must be determined 
jointly by managers and those who perform the work. Realism is introduced because the people 
who will do the work have a good sense of what it takes to accomplish a particular task. In 
addition, this process assures some level of commitment on all sides; management expresses its 
commitment to support the work effort and workers demonstrate their wiliness to do the work. 

Imagine you are an office manager and you have contracted a painter to paint your office. 
Your goal or objective is to have the office painted a pleasing blue color. Consider the following 
conversation that occurs after the job was finished: 



Not only did you paint my office walls blue, 
but you painted the ceiling blue as well! 




You asked me to 

paint the room blue, 

and now you've got a 

blue room. 




Office Manager 



Contractor 



But the ceiling is oppressive! Ceilings should 

never be the same color as the walls. They 

should always be a lighter color. 




You asked for a blue room. 

You're lucky I didn't paint 

the floor blue as well. 




Office Manager 



Contractor 



Figure 10.5: The consequence of not making your objective clear. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



This conversation captures in a nutshell the essence of a major source of 
misunderstandings on projects: The importance of setting clear objectives. The office manager's 



description of how he wanted the room painted meant one thing to him and another to the 
painter. As a consequence, the room was not painted to the office manager's satisfaction. Had his 
objective been more clearly defined, he probably would have had what he wanted. 

Exercise 10.1 (Solution in Appendix A) 

How could you make the objective for painting a room clear such that the office manager gets 

what he wanted? 



Chapter 11 : Project Management Certifications 

Certification in project management is available from the Project Management Institute, 
PRINCE2, ITIL, Critical Chain, and others. Agile project management methodologies (Scrum, 
Extreme Programming, Lean Six Sigma, others) also have certifications. 

11.1 Project Management Institute Overview 



Five volunteers founded the Project Management Institute (PMI) in 1969. Their initial 
goal was to establish an organization where members could share their experiences in project 
management and to discuss issues. Today, PMI is a non-profit project management professional 
association and the most widely recognized organization in terms of promoting project 
management best practices. PMI was formed to serve the interests of the project management 
industry. The premise of PMI is that the tools and techniques of project management are 
common even among the widespread application of projects from the software to the 
construction industry. PMI first began offering the PMP certification exam in 1984. Although it 
took a while for people to take notice, now more than 260,000 individuals around the world hold 
the PMP designation. 

To help keep project management terms and concepts clear and consistent, PMI 
introduced the book Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) Guide in 1987. It was 
updated it in 1996, 2000, 2004, and most recently in 2009 as the fourth edition. At present, there 
are more than 1 million copies of the PMBOK Guide in circulation. The highly regarded Institute 
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) has adopted it as their project management 
standard. In 1999 PMI was accredited as an American National Standards Institute (ANSI) 
standards developer and also has the distinction of being the first organization to have its 
certification program attain International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 9001 
recognition. In 2008, the organization reported more than 260,000 members in over 171 
countries. PMI has its headquarters in Pennsylvania, USA and also has offices in Washington, 
D.C., and Canada, Mexico, Beijing, China, as well as Regional Service Centers in Singapore, 
Brussels (Belgium) and New Delhi (India). Recently, an office was opened in Mumbai (India). 

11.2 Scrum Development Overview 



Scrum is another formal project management/product development methodology and part 
of agile project management. Scrum is a term from rugby (scrummage) that means a way of 
restarting a game. It's like restarting the project efforts every X weeks. It's based on the idea that 
you do not really know how to plan the whole project up front, so you start and build empirical 
data, and then re-plan and iterate from there. 

Scrum uses sequential Sprints for development. Sprints are like small project phases 
(ideally 2 to 4 weeks). The idea is to take one day to plan for what can be done now, then 
develop what was planned for, and demonstrate it at the end of the Sprint. Scrum uses a short 
daily meeting of the development team to check what was done yesterday, what is planned for 
the next day, and what if anything is impeding the team members from accomplishing what they 
have committed to. At the end of the Sprint, what has been demonstrated can then be tested, and 
the next Sprint cycle starts. 



Scrum methodology defines several major roles. They are: 



• 



• 



Product Owner(s): essentially the business owner of the project who knows the 
industry, the market, the customers and the business goals of the project. The Product 
Owner must be intimately involved with the Scrum process, especially the planning 
and the demonstration parts of the Sprint. 

Scrum Master: somewhat like a project manager, but not exactly. The Scrum Master's 
duties are essentially to: remove barriers that impede the progress of the development 
team, teach the Product Owner how to maximize ROI in terms of development effort, 
facilitate creativity and empowerment of team, improve the productivity of the team, 
improve engineering practices and tools, run daily standup meetings, track progress, 
and ensure the health of the team. 

• Development Team: self organizing (light touch leadership), empowered, participate 
in planning and estimating for each Sprint, do the development, and demonstrate the 
results at the end of the Sprint. It has been shown that the ideal size for a development 
team is 1+1-2. The development team can be broken into teamlets that 'swarm' on 
user stories, which are created in the Sprint planning session. 

• Typically, the way a product is developed is that there is a Front Burner (which has 
stories/tasks for the current Sprint), a Back Burner (which has stories for the next 
Sprint), and a Fridge (which has stories for later, as well as process changes). One can 
look at a Product as having been broken down like this: Product -> Features -> 
Stories -> Tasks 

Often effort estimations are done using 'Story Points' (Tiny = 1 SP, Small = 2 SP, 
Medium = 4 SP, Large = 8 SP, Big = 16+ SP, Unknown = ? SP) Stories can be of various types. 
User stories are very common and are descriptions of what the user can do and what happens as a 
result of different actions from a given starting point. Other types of stories are: Analysis, 
Development, QA, Documentation, Installation, Localization, Training, etc. 

Planning meetings for each Sprint require participation by the Product Owner, the Scrum 
Master, and the Development Team. In the planning meeting, they set the goals for the upcoming 
Sprint and select a subset of the product backlog (proposed stories) to work on. The 
Development team de-composes stories to tasks and estimates them, and the Development team 
and Product Owner do final negotiations to determine the backlog for the following Sprint. 

Scrum uses metrics to help with future planning and tracking of progress. A few of them are: 
Burn down - The number of hours remaining in the Sprint versus the time in days. Velocity - 
Essentially, how much effort the team completes per Sprint. (After approximately 3 Sprints with 
the same team, one can get a feel for what the team can do going forward.) 

Some Caveats about using Scrum methodology: 1) You need committed, mature 
developers, 2) You still need to do major requirements definition, some analysis, architecture 
definition, and definition of roles and terms up-front or early, 3) You need commitment from 
company and the Product Owner, and 4) It is best for products that require frequent new releases 



or updates, and less good for large, totally new products that will not allow for frequent upgrades 
once they are released. 



Chapter 12: Culture and Project Management 

12.1 What is Organizational Culture? 

When working with internal and external customers on a project, it is essential to pay 
close attention to relationships, context, history and the organizational culture. Corporate culture 
refers to the beliefs, attitudes, and values that the organization's members share and to the 
behaviors consistent with them (that they give rise to). Corporate culture sets one organization 
apart from another, and dictates how members of the organization will see you, interact with you, 
and sometimes judge you. Often, projects too have a specific culture, work norms and social 
conventions. 

Some aspects of corporate culture are easily observed; others are more difficult to 
discern. You can easily observe the office environment and how people dress and speak. In one 
company individuals work separately in closed offices; in others, teams may work in shared 
environments. The more subtle components of corporate culture, such as the values and 
overarching business philosophy, may not be readily apparent, but they are reflected in member 
behaviors, symbols and conventions used. 

12.2 Project Manager's Checklist: 



Once the corporate culture has been identified, members should try to adapt to the 
frequency, formality, and type of communication customary in that culture. This adaptation will 
strongly affect project members' productivity and satisfaction internally, as well as with the 
client-organization. 

• Which stakeholders will make the decision in this organization on this issue? Will 
your project decisions and documentation have to go up through several layers to get 
approval? If so, what are the criteria and values that may affect acceptance there? For 
example, is being on schedule the most important consideration? Cost? Quality? 

• What type of communication among and between stakeholders is preferred? Do they 
want lengthy documents? Is "short and sweet" the typical standard? 

• What medium of communication is preferred? What kind of medium is usually 
chosen for this type of situation? Check the files to see what others have done. Ask 
others in the organization. 

• What vocabulary and format are used? What colors and designs are used? (i.e., at 
Hewlett-Packard (HP), all rectangles have curved corners) 

12.3 Project Team Challenges 



Today's globally-distributed organizations (and projects) consist of people who have a 
different "worldview". Worldview is a looking glass through which [people] see the world as 
quoted by Bob Shebib (Shebib, 2003. p. 296): "[It is] a belief system about the nature of the 



universe, its perceived effect on human behavior, and one's place in the universe. Worldview is a 
fundamental core set of assumptions explaining cultural forces, the nature of humankind, the 
nature of good and evil, luck, fate, spirits, the power of significant others, the role of time, and 
the nature of our physical and natural resources." 

If, for example, a US manager is sent to India to manage an R&D team or a joint-venture, 
s/he is likely to have to "[cope] with eco-shock or the physiological, psychological, and social 
reaction to a new assignment ecology". Hanging one's shingle in a fluid and culturally-diverse 
organization, project team and work culture; new working relationships and hidden challenges 
have significant implications for performance and knowledge exchange - for the manager and 
his/her colleagues at home and in the host country. 

In most situations there is simply no substitute for having a well-placed person from the 
host culture to guide the new person through the cultural nuances of getting things done. In fact, 
if this 'intervention' isn't present, it is likely to affect the person's motivation or desire to continue 
trying to break through the cultural (and other) barriers. Indeed, optimal effectiveness in such 
situations requires learning of developing third- world cultures or international micro cultures, 
shared perceptions among the culturally diverse task participants on how to get things done. 
Project leaders require sensitivity and awareness of multicultural preferences. The following 
broad areas should be considered: 

• Individual identity and role within project vs. family-of-origin and community 

• Verbal and emotional expressiveness 

• Relationship expectations 

• Style of communication 

• Language 

• Personal priorities, values and beliefs 

• Time Orientation 

There are many interpersonal dynamics and intra-project challenges faced by a globally- 
distributed team. Individual members and the team itself requires important social supports to 
mitigate uncertainty, conflict, motivational challenges, culture shock and the more-encompassing 
eco-shock- that comes from facing head-on the unfamiliar and diverse situations consistent with 
a different cultural and distributed context. 

Diverse and globally distributed project teams (i.e., different ethnic cultures, genders, 
age, and functional capabilities) often working on complex projects spanning multiple time 
zones, geography and history, operating with tight deadlines in cost-conscious organizations, 
need to make time and resources available to physically meet each other, and connect (at the 
very least) at a formal 'kick-off meeting. Especially when working with team members from 
high-context cultures it is essential to meet face-to-face, and discover member's individual 
identities, cultural preferences and share professional knowledge and personal stories; observe 
critical verbal and non-verbal cues (that may not easily be observed online, or on the telephone). 



This is key to establishing a safer climate and building trust for stronger relationships among 
both team members and management. 

12.4 Dealing with Conflict 



The question isn't whether, when or what will create conflict among intercultural team 
members — or with what frequency it will occur. If a team wants to overcome (or harness) 
conflict for effectiveness and productivity, the question is how to navigate and resolve the 
conflicts. Conflict that springs from diversity can actually assist the team in completing complex 
problem- solving. However, if not navigated successfully, it can create relationship strain and 
derail achievement due to increased difficulties in communication and coordination. 

As the global marketplace continues its rapid expansion, researchers are increasingly 
turning their attention to the issue of conflict management. Differing social and cultural values 
don't necessarily increase the number of conflicts a team will experience, but they can have an 
impact on how conflicts get managed and resolved. Cultural awareness is needed for 
understanding and appreciating others' values and behavioral norms. Without that, Global 
Holdings' foreign assignments will become an overwhelming challenge. Self-awareness and skill 
development can aid in resolving the problematic conflict arising from cultural differences to 
help the team maintain good relations and remain productive. 

12.4 Bibliography for Chapter 12 



See Appendix C for references. 




PART III - PROJECT PLANNING 




Full Moon Copyright © Chris Ptacek 

http://www.flickr.eom/photos/chiisptacek/5541729614/sizes/z/in/photostream/ 



Chapter 13: Overview of Project Planning 

After the project has been defined and the project team has been appointed, you are ready 
to enter the second phase in the project management life cycle: the detailed project planning 
phase. 

Project planning is at the heart of the project life cycle, and tells everyone involved to 
where you're going and how you're going to get there. The planning phase is when the project 
plans are documented, the project deliverables and requirements are defined, and the project 
schedule is created. It involves creating a set of plans to help guide your team through the 
implementation and closure phases of the project. The plans created during this phase will help 
you managing time, cost, quality, changes, risk and related issues. It will also help you 
controlling staff and external suppliers, to ensure that you deliver the project on time, budget and 
within schedule. 

The project planning phase is often the most challenging phase for a project manager, as 
you need to make an educated guess about the staff, resources and equipment needed to complete 
your project. You may also need to plan your communications and procurement activities, as 
well as contract any 3rd party suppliers. 

The purpose of the project planning phase is as follows: 

• Establishing business requirements. 

• Establishing cost, schedule, list of deliverables, and delivery dates. 

• Establishing resources plan. 

• Getting management approval and proceeding to the next phase. 
The basic processes of the project planning are: 



• 



Scope planning - specifying the in- scope requirements for the project and facilitates 
creating the work breakdown structure. 

• Preparing the Work Breakdown Structure - spelling out the breakdown of the project 
into tasks and sub tasks. 



• 



Project schedule development - listing the entire schedule of the activities and 
detailing their sequence of implementation. 

• Resource planning - indicating who will do what work, at which time and if any 
special skills are needed to accomplish the project tasks. 



• 



Budget planning - specifying the budgeted cost to be incurred at the completion of 
the project. 

Procurement planning - focusing on vendors outside your company, sub-contracting. 

Risk management - planning for possible risks, considering optional contingency 
plans and mitigation strategies. 

Quality planning - assessing quality criteria to be used for the project. 

Communication planning - designing the communication strategy with all project 
stakeholders. 



The planning phase refines the project's objectives, which were gathered during the 
initiation phase. It includes planning the steps necessary to meet those objectives, by further 
identifying the specific activities and resources required to complete the project. Now that these 
objectives have been recognized, they must be clearly articulated, detailing an in-depth scrutiny 
of each recognized objective. With such scrutiny, our understanding of the objective may 
change. Often the very act of trying to describe something precisely, gives us a better 
understanding of what we are looking at. This articulation serves as the basis for the 
development of requirements. What this means is that after an objective has been clearly 
articulated, we can describe it in concrete (measurable) terms, what we have to do to achieve it. 
Obviously, if we do a poor job of articulating the objective, our requirements will be misdirected 
and the resulting project will not represent the true need. 

Users will often begin describing their objectives in qualitative language. The project 
manager must work with the user to provide quantifiable definitions to those qualitative terms. 
These quantifiable criteria include: schedule, cost, and quality measures. In the case of project 
objectives, these elements are used as measurements to determine project satisfaction and 
successful completion. Subjective evaluations are replaced by actual numeric attributes. 

Example 13.1 

A web user may ask for a fast system. The quantitative requirement should be all 
screens must load in under 3 seconds. Describing the time limit during which the screen 
must load is specific and tangible. For that reason, you'll know that the requirement has 
been successfully completed when the objective has been met. 

Example 13.2 

Let's say that your company is going to produce a holiday batch of eggnog. Your 
objective statement might be stated this way: Christmas Cheer, Inc. will produce two 
million cases of holiday eggnog, to be shipped to our distributors by October 30, at a 
total cost of $1.5 million or less. The objective criteria in this statement are clearly stated 
and successful fulfillment can easily be measured. Stakeholders will know that the 
objectives are met, when the two million cases are produced and shipped by the due date 
within the budget stated. 

When articulating the project objectives you should follow the SMART rule: 



• Specific - get into the details. Objectives should be specific and written in clear, 
concise, and understandable terms. 

• Measurable - use quantitative language so you know when you successfully complete 
the task. Acceptable - agreed with the stakeholders. 

• Realistic - in terms of achievement. Objectives that are impossible to accomplish, are 
not realistic and not attainable. Objectives must be centered in reality. 

• Time bound - deadlines not durations. Objectives should have a timeframe with an 
end date assigned to them. 

If you follow these principles, you'll be certain that your objectives meet the quantifiable 
criteria needed to measure success. 



Chapter 14: Scope Planning 

You always want to know exactly what work has to be done before you start it. You've 
got a collection of team members, and you need to know exactly what they're going to do, in 
order to meet the project's objectives. The scope planning process is the very first thing you do to 
manage your scope. Project scope planning is concerned with the definition of all the work 
needed to successfully meet the project objectives. The whole idea here is that when you start the 
project, you need to have a clear picture of all the work that needs to happen on your project, and 
as the project progresses, you need to keep that scope up to date and written down in the project's 
scope management plan. 

14.1 Defining the Scope 



You already got a head start on refining the project's objectives in quantifiable terms, but 
now you need to plan further and write down all the intermediate and final deliverables that you 
and your team are going to produce over the course of the project. Deliverables include 
everything that you and your team produce for the project; anything that your project will 
deliver. The deliverables for your project include all of the products or services that you and your 
team are performing for the client, customer, or sponsor. They include every intermediate 
document, plan, schedule, budget, blueprint, and anything else that will be made along the way, 
including all of the project management documents you put together. Project deliverables are 
tangible outcomes, measurable results, or specific items that must be produced to consider either 
the project or the project phase completed. Intermediate deliverables like the objectives must be 
specific and verifiable. 

All deliverables must be described in sufficiently low level of details, so that they can be 
differentiated from related deliverables. For example: 

• A twin engine plane versus a single engine plane. 

• A red marker versus a green marker. 

• A daily report versus a weekly report. 

• A departmental solution versus an enterprise solution. 

One of the project manager's primary functions is to accurately document the deliverables 
of the project and then manage the project so that they are produced according to the agreed 
upon criteria. Deliverables are the output of each development phase, described in a quantifiable 
way. 

14.2 Project Requirements 



After all the deliverables are identified, the project manager needs to document all the 
requirements of the project. Requirements describe the characteristics of the final deliverable, 
either a product or a service. They describe the required functionality that the final deliverable 
must have or specific conditions the final deliverable must meet in order to satisfy the objectives 



of the project. A requirement is an objective that must be met. The project's requirements, 
defined in the scope plan, describe what a project is supposed to accomplish and how the project 
is supposed to be created and implemented. Requirements answer the following questions 
regarding the as-is and to-be states of the business: who, what where, when, how much, how 
does a business process work. 

Requirements may include attributes like dimensions, ease of use, color, specific 
ingredients, and so on. If we go back to the example of the company producing holiday eggnog; 
one of the major deliverables is the cartons that hold the eggnog. The requirements for that 
deliverable may include carton design, photographs that will appear on the carton, color choices, 
etc. 

Requirements specify what final the project deliverable should look like and what it 
should do. They can be divided into six basic categories, functional, non-functional, technical, 
user, business, and regulatory requirements. 

14.3 Functional Requirements 



Functional requirements describe the characteristics of the final deliverable, what 
emerges from the project in ordinary non-technical language. They should be understandable to 
the customers, and the customers should play a direct role in their development. Functional 
requirements are what you want the deliverable to do. 

Example 14.3 

If you were buying vehicles for a business, your functional requirement might be: "the 
vehicles should be able to take up to one ton load from a warehouse to a shop". 

Example 14.4 

For a computer system you may define what the system is to do: "the system should store 
all details of a customer's order". 

The important point to note is that what is wanted is specified, and not how it will be 
delivered. 

14.4 Non-Functional Requirements 



Non-functional requirements specify criteria that can be used to judge the final product or 
service that your project delivers. They are restrictions or constraints to be placed on the 
deliverable and how to build it. Their purpose is to restrict the number of solutions that will meet 
a set of requirements. Using the vehicle example (Example 14.3); without any constraints, the 
functional requirement of a vehicle to take a load from a warehouse to a shop, the solutions being 
offered might result in anything from a small to a large truck. Non-functional requirements can 
be split into two types: performance and development. 

To restrict the types of solutions you might include these performance constraints: 

• The purchased trucks should be American made trucks due to government 
incentives. The load area must be covered. 



• The load area must have a height of at least 10 feet. 

Similarly, for the computer system example (Example 14.4), you might specify values for 
the generic types of performance constraints: 

• The response time for information is displayed on the screen for the user. 

• The number of hours a system should be available. 

• The number of records a system should be able to hold. 

• The capacity for growth of the system. 

• The length of time a record should be held for auditing purposes. 
For the customer records example these might be: 

• The system should be available from 9 AM to 5 PM Monday to Friday. 

• The system should be able to hold 100,000 customer records initially. The system 
should be able to add 10,000 records a year for 10 years. A record should be fully 
available on the system for at least 7 years. One important point with these examples 
is that they restrict the number of solution options that are offered to you by the 
developer. In addition to the performance constraints you may include some 
development constraints. 

There are three general types of non-functional development constraints: 

• Time: When a deliverable should be delivered 

• Resource: How much money is available to develop the deliverable 

• Quality: Any standards that are used to develop the deliverable, and development 
methods, etc. 

14.5 Technical Requirements 



Technical requirements emerge from the functional requirements, they answer the 
questions: how will the problem be solved this time and will it be solved technologically and/or 
procedurally. They answer how the system needs to be designed and implemented, to provide 
required functionality and fulfill required operational characteristics. 

For example, in a software project, the functional requirements may stipulate that a 
database system will be developed to allow access to financial data through a remote terminal; 
the corresponding technical requirements would spell out the required data elements, the 
language in which the database management system will be written (due to existing knowledge 
in-house), the hardware on which the system will run (due to existing infrastructure), 
telecommunication protocols that should be used and so forth. 



14.6 User Requirements 



User requirements describe what the users need to do with the system or product. They 
focus is on the user experience with the system under all scenarios. These requirements are the 
input for the next development phases: user- interface design and system test cases design. 

14.7 Business Requirements 



Business requirements are the needs of the sponsoring organization, always from a 
management perspective. Business requirements are statements of the business rationale for the 
project. They are usually expressed in broad outcomes, satisfying the business needs, rather than 
specific functions the system may perform. These requirements grow out of the vision for the 
product that, in turn, is driven by mission (or business) goals and objectives. 

14.8 Regulatory requirements 



Regulatory requirements can be internal or external and are usually non-negotiable. 
They are the restrictions, licenses and laws, applicable to a product or business, imposed by the 
government. 

14.9 An Example of Requirements 



Automated teller machines (ATMs) can be used to illustrate a wide range of requirements 
(Figure 14.2). What are some of the physical features of these machines, and what kinds of 
functions do they perform for the bank's customers? Why did banks put these systems in place? 
What are the high level business requirements? 





^F ^^i f il 


24 HOUR BANKING 


_"T 


r " 


r 


■HBI 







Figure 14.2: A typical exterior automated teller machines (ATMs). 

Photo from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



The following represents one possible example of each type of requirement as they would 



be applied to a bank's external ATM. 

• ATM functional requirement: The system shall enable the user to select whether or 
not to produce a hardcopy transaction receipt, before completing a transaction. 

• ATM non-functional requirement: All displays shall be in white, 14 pt Arial text on 
black background. 

• ATM technical requirement: The ATM system will connect seamlessly to the existing 
customers' database. 

• ATM user requirement: The system shall complete a standard withdrawal from a 
personal account, from login to cash, in less than two minutes -. 

• ATM business requirement: By providing superior service to our retail customers, 
Monumental Bank's ATM network will allow us to increase associated service fee 
revenue by 10% annually on an ongoing basis, using a baseline of December 2008. 

• ATM regulatory requirement: All ATMs shall connect to standard utility power 
sources within their civic jurisdiction, and be supplied with uninterruptible power 
source approved by the company. 

The effective specification of requirements is one of the most challenging undertakings 
project managers face. Inadequately specified requirements will guarantee poor project results. 

Documenting requirements is much more than just the process of writing down the 
requirements as the user sees them; it should cover not only what decisions have been made, but 
why they have been made, as well. Understanding the reasoning that was used to arrive at a 
decision is critical in avoiding repetition. For example, the fact that a particular feature has been 
excluded, because it is simply not feasible, needs to be recorded. If it is not, then the project risks 
wasted work and repetition, when a stakeholder requests the feature be reinstated during 
development or testing. 

Once the requirements are documented, have the stakeholders sign off on their 
requirements as a confirmation of what they desire. 

While the project manager is responsible for making certain the requirements are 
documented, it does not mean that the project manager performs this task. The project manager 
enlists the help of all the stakeholders: business analysts, requirement analysts, business process 
owners, customers and other team members to conduct the discussions, brain-storming, 
interviews, documenting and signing-off the requirements. The project manager is responsible 
only for enabling the process and facilitating it. If the project manager feels that the quality of the 
document is questionable, his/her duty is to stop the development process. 

The project manager reviews the requirements, incorporates them into the project 
documentation library, and uses them as an input for the project plan. 



Chapter 15: Project Schedule Planning 



15.1 Preparing the work breakdown structure 

Now that we have the deliverables and requirements well defined, the process of breaking 
down the work of the project via a work breakdown structure begins. The Work Breakdown 
Structure (WBS) defines the scope of the project. It breaks the work down into smaller 
components that can be scheduled, estimated, easily monitored and controlled. The idea behind 
the work breakdown schedule is simple. You subdivide a complicated task into smaller tasks, 
until you reach a level that cannot be further subdivided. 

Anyone familiar with the arrangements of folders and files in a computer memory, or 
who has researched their ancestral family tree, should be familiar with this idea. You stop 
breaking down the work when you reach a low enough level to perform a relative accurate 
estimate. Usually, we estimate more accurately how long a small task will take and how much it 
will cost to perform, and we underestimate significantly large efforts. Each descending level of 
the WBS represents an increased level of detailed definition of the project work. 

As an example, if I want to clean a room, I might begin by picking up clothes, toys, and 
other things that have been dropped on the floor. I could use a vacuum cleaner to get dirt out of 
the carpet. I might take down the curtains and take them to the cleaners, then dust the furniture. 
All of these tasks are subtasks performed to clean the room. As for vacuuming the room, I might 
have to get the vacuum cleaner out of the closet, connect the hose, empty the bag, and put the 
machine back in the closet. These are smaller tasks to be performed while accomplishing the 
subtask called vacuuming. The diagram in Figure 15.1 shows how this might be portrayed in 
WBS format. 



1.0 Mop floor 



1.1 Get mop and 
bucket out 



2.0 Dust 



1.2 Mix cleaner with 
water in bucket 



2.1 Coffe table 



2.2 Blinds 



1.3 Rinse out bucket 
and mop 



0.0 Clean Room 



3.0 Vacuum 



4.0 Pich up floor 



3.1 Get vacuum out of 
closet 



3.2 Vacuum carpet 



3.3 Empty bag 



4.0 Clean curtains 



4.1 Toys 



4.1.1 Put toys in 
box 



1.2 Clothes 



3.4 Connect hose and 
plug 



4.1 Remove curtains 



4.2 Take to cleaners 



4.3 Hang curtains 



4.2.1 hang up in 

closet 



Figure 15.1: A work breakdown structure (WBS) for cleaning a room. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



It is very important to note that when we do a WBS, we do not worry about the sequence 
in which the work is performed or any dependencies between them. The order of events will be 
worked out when we develop the schedule. For example, under 3.0 Vacuum (in Figure 11.3), it 
would be obvious that 3.3 Vacuum carpet would be performed after 3.4 Connect hose and plug. 
However, you will probably find yourself thinking sequentially, as it seems to be human nature 
to do so. The main idea of creating a WBS is to capture all of the tasks, irrespective of their 
order. So if you find yourself and other members of your team thinking sequentially, don't be too 
concerned, but don't get hung up on trying to diagram the sequence, or you will slow down the 
process of task identification. 

A WBS can be structured any way it makes sense to you and your project. In practice, the 
chart structure is used quite often (as in the example in Figure 15.1) and it can be composed in an 
outline form as well (Figure 15.2). 



Cleasw fcoo-m/ 


1.0 Hop floor 


1.1 Get mop outofclxnet 


1.2 MC^/cietfuoer with water uw 


bucket 


1.3 KCn^e/ out bucket cw\cL Mop 


Z.OVutt 


2.1 Coffees Table/ 


2.2 BlOncU- 


3.0 Vacuum; 


3.1 Get vacuum/ out of closet 


3.2 Vacuum/carpet 


3.3 twvpty bag- 


3A Connect hoie^ and/phu^ 


4.0 PCchltp floor 


4-.1 Toyy 


4.1.1 PuttoyyCn/toybov 


4.2 Clothe* 


4.2.1 Hangup iAvclozet 


5.0 Cleu^v Curtain* 


5.1 "Rewijove/ Curtain* 


5.2 Take/ to- Cleaner y 


5.3 UaAnty Curtain* 



Figure 15.2 An outline format of a work breakdown structure (WBS) for cleaning a room. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



You'll notice that each element at each level of the WBS (either Figure 15.1 or Figure 
15.2) is assigned a unique identifier. This unique identifier is typically a number, and it's used to 
sum and track costs, schedules, and resources associated with WBS elements. These numbers are 
usually associated with the corporation's chart of accounts, which is used to track costs by 
category. Collectively, these numeric identifiers are known as "the code of accounts". 

There are also many ways you can organize the WBS. For example, it can be organized 



by either deliverables or phases. The major deliverables of the project are used as the first level 
in the WBS. For example, if you are doing a multimedia project the deliverables might include 
producing a book, CD and a DVD (Figure 15.4). 



1.0 Book 








- 


1.1 Writing 












1.2 Publishing 




1.3 Producing 








1.4 Selling 


















1.4.1 Retail 








1.4.2 Mail 



0.0 Multimedia Project 



? 



2.0 CD 



2.1 Writing 



2.2 Recording 



2,3 Producing 



2.4 Selling 



2.4.1 Retail 



2.4,2 Mail 



3 DVD 
















3.1 Writing 












3.2 Recording 












3,3 Producing 












3.4 Selling 


















3.4.1 Retail 








3.4.2 Mail 



Figure 15.4: An example of a work breakdown structure (WBS) based on project deliverable. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



Many projects are structured or organized by project phases. Each phase would represent 
the first level of the WBS and their deliverables would be the next level and so on (Figure 15.5). 



1.0 Phase 1 



1.1 Process requirements 



1.2 Data requirements 



0.0 Project XXX 



1.2.1 Identify all data entries 



1 .2.2 Load data modeling tool 



1 .3 Conceptual design 



4 



2.0 Phase 2 



2.1 Facilities 



2.2 Equipment 



2.3 People 



2.3,1 Fulltime 



2.3.2 Part time 



2.3.3 Temporary 



3.0 Phase 3 



3.1 Location 



3.1.1 Peru 



3.1.2 China 



*■ 3.1.3 Canada 



3.2 Surveys 



3.3 New designs 



Figure 15.5: An example of a work breakdown structure (WBS) based on project phase. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



As mentioned earlier, the project manager is free to determine the number of levels in the 
WBS, based on the complexity of the project. You need to include enough levels to accurately 



estimate project time and costs, but not so many levels that are difficult to distinguish between 
components. Regardless of the number of levels in a WBS, the lowest level in a WBS is called "a 
work package". 

Work packages are the components that can be easily assigned to one person, or team of 
people, with clear accountability and responsibility for completing the assignment. The work 
package level is where time estimates, costs estimates and resource estimates are determined. 

Now we are up and running toward the development of our project schedule. In order to 
develop our schedule, we first need to define the activities, sequence them in the right order, 
estimate resources and estimate the time it will take to complete the tasks. 

The activity definition process is a further breakdown of the work package elements of 
the WBS. It documents the specific activities needed to fulfill the deliverable detailed in the 
WBS. These are not deliverables but the individual units of work that must be completed to 
fulfill the deliverables. Activity definition uses everything we already know about the project to 
divide the work into activities that can be estimated. You might want to look at all the lessons 
learned from similar projects your company has done to get a good idea of what you need to do 
on the current one. 

Expert judgment in the form of project team members with prior experience developing 
project scope statements and WBS can help you define activities. You might also use experts in a 
particular field to help define tasks, if you were asked to manage a project in a new domain, to 
help you understand what activities were going to be involved. It could be that you create an 
activity list and then have the expert review it and suggest changes. Alternatively, you could 
involve the expert from the very beginning and ask to have an activity definition conversation 
with him/her before even making your first draft of the list. 

Sometimes you start a project without knowing a lot about the work that you'll be doing 
later. Rolling wave planning lets you plan and schedule only the portion that you know enough 
about to plan well. When you don't know enough about a project, you can use placeholders for 
the unknown portions, until you know more. These are extra items that are put at high levels in 
the WBS to allow you to plan for the unknown. 

15.2 A case study 



Susan and Steve have decided to tie the knot, but they don't have much time to plan their 
wedding. They want the big day to be unforgettable, they want to invite many people and 
provide them a great time. They've always dreamed of a June wedding, but it's already January. 
Just thinking about all of the details involved is overwhelming. Sometime, when they were 
choosing the paper for the invitations, the couple realized that they need help. Susan has been 
dreaming of the big day since she was 12, but it seems that there's so little time for all the tasks 
to be completed. 




Steve, we need some help. 




Don't worry. My sister's wedding planner was great. 
Let me give her a call. 

Steve calls the wedding planner Sally. 




Hello Susan and Steve. 




We want everything to be perfect. My sister said you 

really saved her wedding. I know she gave you over a 

year to plan. 






There is so much to do ! Invitations, food, guests, and 
music. 




Oh no, we haven't even booked a place! 




And it has to be done right. We can't print the 
initiations until we have the menu planned. We can't 
do the seating arrangements until we have the RSVPs. 
We aren't sure what kind of band to get for the 
reception, or should it be a DJ? We're just 
overwhelmed. 




My sister said you really saved her wedding. I know 
she gave you over a year to plan. 





Q 




But I've always dreamed of a June wedding, and I'm 
not willing to give that up. I know it's late, but Sally 
can you help us? 




l "7" \ * i 




Take it easy guys. I've got it under control. We've a lot 
of people and activities to get under control. You guys 
really should have called six months ago, but we'll still 
make this wedding happen on time. 



Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 

Much work has to be done before June. First, Sally figures out what work needs to be 
done. She starts to put together a to-do-list. 

• Invitations 

• Flowers 

• Wedding Cake 

• Dinner Menu 



Band 



Since many different people are involved in the making of the wedding, it takes much 
planning to coordinate all the work in the right order, by the right people at the right time. 
Initially, Sally was worried that she didn't have enough time to make sure that everything would 
be done properly. However, she knew that she had some powerful time management tools on her 
side when she took the job, and these tools would help her to synchronize all the required tasks. 

To get started, Sally arranged all the activities in a work breakdown structure. Exercise 
15.1 presents part of the WBS Sally made for the wedding. 



Exercise 15.1 (Solution in Appendix A) 

Arrange the following activities into the WBS to show how the work items 
decompose into activities. 

• Shop for shoes 

• Create guest list 



Tailoring and fitting 
Shop for dress 
Find caterer 
Cater the wedding 
Wait for RSVPs 
Mail the invitations 
Finalize the menu 
Print the invitations 
Choose the bouquet 



0-0 Wedding 



1 .0 Invitations 























































2.0 Food 



3.0 Bridal 



Figure 15.4: An example of a work breakdown structure (WBS) based on project phase. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



15.3 Activity Definition 



Now that the activity definitions for the work packages have been completed, the next 
task is to complete the activity list. The project activity list is a list of everything that needs to be 
done to complete your project, including all the activities that must be accomplished to deliver 
the work package. Next you want to define the activity attributes. Here's where the description of 



each activity is kept. All of the information you need to figure out; the order of the work should 
be here too. So any predecessor activities, successor activities or constraints should be listed in 
the attributes along with descriptions and any other information about resources or time that you 
need for planning. The three main kinds of predecessors are finish-to-start (FS), start-to- start 
(SS) and finish-to-finish (FF). The most common kind of predecessor is the finish-to-start. It 
means that one task needs to be completed before another one can start. When you think of 
predecessors, this is what you usually think of; one thing needs to end before the next can begin. 
It's called finish-to- start because the first activity's finish leads into the second activity's start 
(Figure 15.5). 



Print invitations 



Address 



Figure 15.5: An example of a finish-to- start (FS) predecessor. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



The start-to- start predecessor is a little less common, but sometimes you need to 
coordinate activities so they begin at the same time (Figure 15.6). 



Give toast 



Serve cake 



Figure 15.6: An example of a start-to- start (SS) predecessor. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



In the finish-to-finish predecessor it shows activities that finish at the same time (Figure 



15.7). 



Play "Here comes 
the bride" 



Bride walks down 
the isle 



Figure 15.7: An example of a finish-to-finish (FF) predecessor. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



It is possible to have to have start-to-finish (SF) predecessors. This happens when 
activities require that another task be started before the successor task can finish. An example 
might be that the musicians cannot finish playing until the guests have started leaving the 
ceremony-In addition there are some particular types of predecessors that must be considered. 

15.3.1 External Predecessors 



Sometimes your project will depend on things outside the work you're doing. For the 
wedding, we are depending on the wedding party before us to be out of the reception hall in time 
for us to decorate. The decoration of the reception hall then depends on that as an external 
predecessor. 

15.3.2 Discretionary Predecessors 



These are usually process or procedure driven or best practice techniques based on past 
experience. In the wedding example: Steve and Susan want the bridesmaids to arrive at the 
reception before the couple arrives. There's no necessity; it is just a matter of preference. 

15.3.3 Mandatory Predecessors 



You can't address an invitation that hasn't been printed yet. So, printing invitations is a 
mandatory predecessor for addressing them. Mandatory predecessors are the kinds that have to 
exist just because of the nature of the work. 

15.4 Leads and Lags 



Sometimes you need to give some extra time between activities. Lag time is when you 
purposefully put a delay between the predecessor task and the successor. For example, when the 
bride and her father dance, the others wait awhile before they join them (Figure 15.8). 



Bride and father dance 



:\/eryone else dances 



Figure 15.8: A lag means making sure that one task waits a while before it gets started. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



Lead time is when you give a successor task some time to get started before the 
predecessor finishes (Figure 15.9). So you might want the caterer preparing dessert an hour 
before everybody is eating dinner. 



Serve dinner 




Figure 15.9: A lead is when you let a task get started before its predecessor is done. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



15.4 Milestones 



All of the important checkpoints of your project are tracked as milestones. Some of them 
could be listed in your contract as requirements of successful completion; some could just be 
significant points in the project that you want to keep track of. The milestone list needs to let 
everyone know which are required and which are not. 

Some milestones for Susan and Steve's wedding might be: 
• Invitations sent 



Menu finalized 
Location booked 



Bridesmaids' dresses fitted 



As you figure out which activities will need to be done, you may realize that the scope 
needs to change. When that happens, you need to create a change request and send it through the 
change control system. So back to our couple and their nuptial plan. 









We just got the programs back from the printer and 
they're all wrong. 



The quartet cancelled. They had another wedding that 
day. 



Aunt Jane is supposed to sing at the service, but after 
what happened at her uncle's funeral, I think I want 
someone else to do it. 



Should we really have a pan flute player? I'm 
beginning to think it might be overkill. 



Apparently! Maybe we should hold off on printing the 
invitations until these things are worked out. 



OK, let's think about exactly how we want to do this. I 
think we need to be sure about how we want the 
service to go before we do any more printing. 



Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



15.5 The Activity Sequencing Process 



Now that we know what we have to do to make the wedding a success, we need to focus 
on the order of the work. Sally sat down with all of the activities she had defined for the wedding 
and decided to figure out exactly how they needed to happen. That's where she used the activity 
sequencing process. 

The activity attribute list Sally created had most of the predecessors and successors 
necessary written in it. This is where she thought of what comes first, second, third, etc. Sally's 
milestone list had major pieces of work written down and there were a couple of changes to the 
scope she had discovered along the way that were approved and ready to go. 

Example 15.5 Milestone list: Steve and Susan had asked that the invitations be printed at 
least three months in advance to be sure that everyone had time to RSVP. That's a milestone on 
Sally's list. 

Example 15.6 Change request: When Sally realized that Steve and Susan were going to 
need another limo to take the bridesmaids to the reception hall, she put that change through 
change control-including running everything by Susan's mother - and it was approved. 



15.6 Creating the Network Diagram 



The first step in developing the schedule is to develop a network diagram of the WBS 
work packages. The network diagram is a way to visualize the interrelationships of project 
activities. Network diagrams provide a graphical view of the tasks and how they relate to one 
another. The tasks in the network are the work packages of the WBS. All of the WBS tasks must 
be included in the network because they have to be accounted for in the schedule. Leaving even 
one task out of the network could change the overall schedule duration, estimated costs, and 
resource allocation commitments. 

The first step is to arrange the tasks from your WBS into a sequence (Figure 15.12). 
Some tasks can be accomplished at any time throughout the project where other tasks depend on 
input from another task or are constrained by time or resources. 



"Pick calligrapher' 

and "pick printer" 

have no 

predecessors 



This arrow shows a finish-to-start predecessor 

between the "pick calligrapher" and "address 

nvitations" activities 






Address 




Send 




invitations 




invitations 


The successor to "print 




V 


invitations" is "address 
invitations" 




Finish 


Print 








invitations 







"Printing invitations" 

depends on designing 

invitations" 



Figure 15.12: The relationship between the work breakdown structure (WBS) and the network 

diagram. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



The WBS is not a schedule, but it is the basis for it; the network diagram is a schedule but is 
used primarily to identify key scheduling information that ultimately goes into user friendly 
schedule formats, such as milestone and Gantt charts. 

The network diagram provides important information to the project team. It provides 
information about how the tasks are related (Figure 15.12), where the risk points are in the 
schedule, how long it will take as currently planned to finish the project, and when each task 
needs to begin and end. 

In our wedding planner example, Sally would look for relationships between tasks and 
determine what can be done in parallel and what activities need to wait for others to complete. 
As an example, Figure 15.13 shows how the activities involved in producing the invitations 
depend on one another. Showing the activities in rectangles and their relationships as arrows is 
called a precedence diagramming method (PDM). This kind of diagram is also called an activity- 
on-node (AON) diagram. 

Another way to show how tasks relate is with the activity-on- arrow (AOA). Although 
activity-on-node (AON) is more commonly used and is supported by all project management 
programs, PERT is the best-known AOA-type diagram and is the historical basis of all network 
diagramming. The main difference is the AOA diagram is traditionally drawn using circles as the 
nodes, with nodes representing the beginning and ending points of the arrows or tasks. In the 
AOA network, the arrows represent the activities or tasks (Figure 15.14). 





WBS 
1.0 
















'' 




V 




<' 


WBS 
1.1 




WBS 
1.2 




WBS 
1.3 



WBS 
1.1.1 



WBS 
1.1.2 



WBS 
1.2.1 



WBS 
1.2.2 



WBS 
1.3.1 



WBS 
1.3.2 



r- ► 


WBS 
1.1.1 






WBS 
1.2.1 






WBS 
1.2.2 


















































Start 












Finish 
























WBS 
1.1.2 




WBS 
1.3.1 




WBS 
1.3.2 





























Figure 15.13: An example of an activity on node (AON) diagram. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 




Figure 15.14.: An example of an activity narrow (AOA) network diagram. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



All network diagrams have the advantages as showing task interdependencies, start and 
end times, and the critical path (the longest path through the network) but the AOA network also 



has some disadvantages that limit the use of the method. 

The three major disadvantages of the AOA method are: 

• The AOA network can only show finish to start relationships. It is not possible to 
show lead and lag except by adding or subtracting time, which makes project tracking 
difficult. 

• There are instances when dummy activities can occur in an AOA network. Dummy 
activities are activities that show the dependency of one task on other tasks but for 
other than technical reasons. For example, a task may be dependent on another 
because it would be more cost effective to use the same resources for the two; 
otherwise the two tasks could be accomplished in parallel. Dummy activities do not 
have durations associated with them. They simply show that a task has some kind of 
dependence on another task. 

• AOA diagrams are not as widely used as AON simply because the latter are 
somewhat simpler to use and all project management software programs can 
accommodate AON networks, whereas not all can accommodate AOA networks. 



Chapter 16: Resource Planning 

In our case study it is clear that Steve and Susan have resource problems. Getting a 
handle on all of the tasks that have to be done is a great start, but it's not enough to know the 
tasks and the order they come in. Before you can put the final schedule together, you need to 
know who is going to do each job, and the things they need available to them in order to do it. 

"We've got so much to do! Invitations, catering, music... and I've got no idea who's going 
to do it all. I'm totally overwhelmed." From this statement it is clear that Susan is worried about 
human resources. In comparison, Steve realizes that not all resources are people. 

And it's not just people. We need food, flowers, a cake, a sound system, and a venue. 
How do we get a handle on this? 

Resources are people, equipment, place, money, or anything else that you need in order to 
do all of the activities that you planned for. Every activity in your activity list needs to have 
resources assigned to it. Before you can assign resources to your project, you need to know their 
availability. Resource availability includes information about what resources you can use on 
your project, when they're available to you, and conditions of their availability. Don't forget that 
some resources like consultants or training rooms have to be scheduled in advance, and they 
might only be available at certain times. You'll need to know this before you can finish planning 
your project. If you are starting to plan in January, a June wedding is harder to plan than one in 
December, because the wedding halls are all booked up in advance. That is clearly a resource 
constraint. You'll also need the activity list that you created earlier, and you'll need to know 
about how your organization typically handles resources. Once you've got a handle on these 
things, you're set for resource estimation. 

16.1 Estimating the Resources 



The goal of activity resource estimating is to assign resources to each activity in the 
activity list. There are five tools and techniques for estimating activity resources. 

Expert judgment means bringing in experts who have done this sort of work before and 
getting their opinions on what resources are needed (Figure 11.15). 

Alternative analysis means considering several different options for how you assign 
resources. This includes varying the number of resources as well as the kind of resources you 
use. Many times, there's more than one way to accomplish an activity and alternative analysis 
helps decide among the possibilities. 

Published estimating data is something that project managers in a lot of industries use to 
help them figure out how many resources they need. They rely on articles, books, journals, and 
periodicals that collect, analyze, and publish data from other people's projects. 

Project management software such as Microsoft project will often have features designed 
to help project managers estimate resource needs and constraints and find the best combination 



of assignments for the project. 

Bottom-up estimating means breaking down complex activities into pieces and working 
out the resource assignments for each piece. It is a process of estimating individual activity 
resource need or cost and then adding these up together to come up with a total estimate. 
Bottom-up estimating is a very accurate means of estimating, provided the estimates at the 
schedule activity level are accurate. However, it takes a considerable amount of time to perform 
bottom-up estimating because every activity must be accessed and estimated accurately to be 
included in the bottom-up calculation. The smaller and more detailed the activity, the greater the 
accuracy and cost of this technique. 

In each of the following scenarios of planning Steve and Susan's wedding, determine 
which of the five activity resource estimation tools and techniques is being used. 

Solutions to these exercises are in Appendix A. 



Exercise 16.1 Sally has to figure out what to do for the music at Steve and Susan's wedding. 
She considers using a DJ, a rock band, or a string quartet. 



Exercise 16.2 The latest issue of Wedding Planner's Journal has an article on working with 
caterers. It includes a table that shows how many waiters work with varied guest-list sizes. 



Exercise 16.3 There's a national wedding consultant who specializes in Caribbean themed 
weddings. Sally gets in touch with her to ask about menu options. 



Exercise 16.4 Sally downloads and fills out a specialized spreadsheet that a project manager 
developed to help with wedding planning. 



Exercise 16.5 There's so much work that has to be done to set up the reception hall that 
Sally has to break it down into five different activities in order to assign jobs. 



Exercise 16.6 Sally asks Steve and Susan to visit several different caterers and sample 
various potential items for the menu. 



Exercise 16.7 Sally calls up her friend who knows specifics of the various venues in their 
area for advice on which one would work best. 



16.2 Estimating Activity Durations 



Once you're done with activity resource estimating, you've got everything you need to 
figure out how long each activity will take. That's done in a process called activity duration 
estimating. This is where you look at each activity in the activity list, consider its scope and 
resources, and estimate how long it will take to perform. 

Estimating the duration of an activity means starting with the information you have about 
that activity and the resources that are assigned to it, and then working with the project team to 
come up with an estimate. Most of the time you'll start with a rough estimate and then refine it to 
make it more accurate. You'll use these five tools and techniques to create the most accurate 
estimates: 



• Expert judgment will come from your project team members who are familiar with 
the work that has to be done. If you don't get their opinion, then there's a huge risk 
that your estimates will be wrong. 

• Analogous estimating is when you look at similar activities from previous projects t 
and look at how long they took before. But this only works if the activities and 
resources are similar. 

• Parametric estimating means plugging data about your project into a formula, 
spreadsheet, database, or computer program that comes up with an estimate. The 
software or formula that you use for parametric estimating is based on a database of 
actual durations from past projects. 

• Three-point estimates are when you come up with three numbers: a realistic estimate 
that's most likely to occur, an optimistic one that represents the best-case scenario, 
and a pessimistic one that represents the worst-case scenario. The final estimate is the 
weighted average of the three. 

• Reserve analysis means adding extra time to the schedule (called a contingency 
reserve or a buffer) to account for extra risk. 

In each of the following scenarios for planning Steve and Susan's wedding, determine 
which of the five activity duration estimation tools and techniques is being used. Solutions are in 
Appendix A. 

Exercise 16.8 There are two different catering companies at the wedding. Sally asks the 
head chef at each of them to give her an estimate of how long it will take each of them to do the 
job. 

Exercise 16.9 There's a spreadsheet Sally always uses to figure out how long it takes 
guest to RSVP. She enters the number of guests and their zip codes, and it calculates estimates 
for her. 

Exercise 16.10 Sally's done four weddings that are very similar to Steve and Susan's, and 
in all four of them it took exactly the same amount of time for the caterers to set up the reception 
hall. 



The activity duration estimates are an estimate of how long each activity in the activity 
list will take. This is a quantitative measure usually expressed in hours, weeks, days, or months. 
Any work period is fine, and you'll use different work periods for different jobs. A small job 
(like booking a DJ) may just take a few hours; a bigger job (like catering-including deciding on a 
menu, ordering ingredients, cook food and serving guests on the big day) could take days. 

Another thing to keep in mind when estimating the duration of the activities, is 
determining the effort involved. Duration is the amount of the time that an activity takes, while 
effort if the total number of person-hours that are expended. If it takes two people six hours to 



carve the ice sculpture for the centerpiece of a wedding, the duration is six hours. But if two 
people worked on it for the whole time, it took twelve person-hours of effort to create. 

You'll also learn more about the specific activities while you're estimating them. That's 
something that always happens. You have to really think through all of the aspects of a task in 
order to estimate it. As you learn more about the specific activities remember to update the 
activity attributes. 

If we go back to our case study of the wedding, we can see that while Sally has got a 
handle on how long things are going to take, she still has some work to do before she's got the 
whole project under control. Steve and Susan know where they want to get married, and they've 
got the place booked now. But, what about the caterer? They have no idea who's going to be 
providing food. And what about the band they want? Will the timing with their schedule work 
out? 

"If the caterers come too early, the food will sit around under heat lamps. But, if they 
come too late, then the band won't have time to play. I just don't see how we'll ever work this 
out. 

It's not easy to plan for a lot of resources when they have tight time restrictions and 
overlapping constraints. How do you figure out a schedule that makes everything fit together? 
You're never going to have the complete resource picture until your done building the schedule. 
And the same goes for your activity list and duration estimates too! It's only when you lay out 
the schedule that you'll figure out that some of your activities and durations didn't quite work. 

16.3 Project Schedule 



The project schedule should be approved and signed off by stakeholders and functional 
managers. This ensures they have read the schedule, understand the dates and resource 
commitments, and will cooperate. You'll also need to obtain confirmation that resources will be 
available as outlined in the schedule. The schedule cannot be finalized until you receive approval 
and commitment for the resource assignments outlined in it. 

Once the schedule is approved, it will become your baseline for the remainder of the 
project. Project progress and task completion will be monitored and tracked against the project 
schedule to determine if the project is on course as planned. 

The schedule can be displayed in a variety of ways, some of which are variations of what 
you have already seen. Project schedule network diagrams will work as schedule diagrams when 
you add the start and finish dates to each activity. These diagrams usually show the activity 
dependencies and critical path. 

The critical path method is an important tool for keeping your projects on track. Every 
network diagram has something that is called the critical path. It's the string of activities that, if 
you add up all of the durations, is longer than any other path through the network. It usually 
starts with the first activity in the network and usually ends with the last one. 



D 


Aunt Jane is a vegetarian. That won't be a problem, 
right? 








Well, let's see. What menu did we give the caterers? 


n 


We didn't give it to them yet; because we won't have 
the final menu until everyone RSVPs and lets we know 
which entree they want. 




(? 




But they can't RSVP because we haven't sent out the 
invitations ! What's holding that up? 


□ 


We're still waiting to get them back from the printer. 
We can't send them out if we don't have them yet ! 


o 


Oh no ! I still have to tell the printer what to print on 
the invitations, and what paper to use. 



D 


But you were waiting on that until we finished the 
guest list. 




* 




What a mess ! 



Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, 

http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



Steve thought Aunt Jane being a vegetarian was just a little problem. But it turns out to be 
a lot bigger than either Steve or Susan realized at first. How'd a question about one guest's meal 
lead to such a huge mess? 

The reason that the critical path is critical is that every single activity on the path must finish 
on time in order for the project to come in on time. A delay in any one of the critical path 
activities will cause the entire project to be delayed (Figure 16.1). 



A delay here,,. 


















Create 
guest list 




Print the 
invitaions 




Mail the 
invitations 




Wait for 
RSVPs 




Finalize the 
menu 











Cater the 

wedding 



will cause 
problems here! 



Figure 16.1: An example of problems that can be caused within the critical path. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, 

http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1 .4/ 



Knowing where your critical path is can give you a lot of freedom. If you know an 
activity is not on the critical path, then you know a delay in that activity may not necessarily 
delay the project. This can really help you handle emergency situations. Even better, it means 
that if you need to bring your project in earlier than was originally planned, you know that by 
adding resources to the critical path will be much more effective than adding them elsewhere. 

It's easy to find the critical path in any project. Of course, on a large project with dozens 
or hundreds of tasks, you'll probably use software like Microsoft Project to find the critical path 
for you. But when it does, it's following the same exact steps that are followed here. 

Step 1 . Start with a network diagram. 



Look for paths by 
starting here and 
moving to the right 



Start 




4 




2 






Activity "C" 


Activity "A" 









You'll usually write 

the duration above 

each node in the 

diagram 



Activity "B" 




Finish 



Each time you 

see a branch in 

the actual 1 1 I \ Two branches means 

diagram that Activity "D" » Activity "E" two additional paths 

means you've 

found another 

path 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, 

http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1 .4/ 

Step 2. Find all the paths in the diagram. A path is any string of activities that goes from 
the start of the project to the end. 

Start -> Activity "A" -> Activity "B" -> Finish 
Start -> Activity "A" -> Activity "C" -> Finish 
Start -¥ Activity "D" -> Activity "E" -> Finish 

Step 3. Find the duration of each path by adding up the durations of each of the activities 
on the path. 

Start -¥ Activity "A" -> Activity "B" -> Finish = 4+7=11 
Start -> Activity "A" -> Activity "C" -> Finish = 4+2 = 6 



Start -> Activity "D" -> Activity "E" -> Finish = 3 + 5 = 8 

Step 4. The first path has a duration of 11, which is longer than the other paths, so it's the 
critical path. 

The schedule can also be displayed using a Gantt chart (Figure 16.2). Gantt charts are 
easy to read and commonly used to display schedule activities. Depending on the software you 
use to display the Gantt chart, it might also show activity sequences, activity start and end dates, 
resource assignments, activity dependencies, and the critical path. Gantt charts are also known as 
bar charts. 



Start 



Finish 



| Apr 9, '01 



Apr 16, '01 | Apr 23, '01 I Apr 30 '01 | Mey 7 '01 



f|s|t|t|s|m|w|f|s|t|t|s|m|w|f|s|t|t|s 



':'.::: 



M |V . 



i)e?k?r. Se'ver daiabasv; emieture 
Implement Database Module 
Implement Database Utility Module 
Implement SuperUserManager Module 
Implement I/O modules 
Research RMILitc and Ninjo 
Design Pah database structure 



2 days 

6 days 
4 days 
2 days 

7 days 



Sat 4/7/01 
Mon 4/9/01 
Sun 4/1 5/01 
Thu 4/1 9/01 
Sun 4/8/01 



4 cloys 



1 days 



implement Medina Module 



2 days 



Implement Mefcti, r-i ^fenager Module 
Implement Open Meeting Monitor module 
Implement Schedule Module 



2 days 



Sun 4/1 5/01 

Thu 4/1 9/01 

Mon 4/9/01 

Wed 4/1 1/01 



3 days Fri 4/1 3/01 



3 days Wed 4/1 8/01 



Implement Co 1 -dule Module 

Implement Authentication Manager Module 
Implement Log Manager Module 



4 days Sat 4/21/01 



1 day Thu 4/26/01 



Sun 4/8/01 

Sat 4/1 4701 

Wed 4/1 8/01 

Fri 4/21/01 
Sat 4/14/01 



1 day Fri 4/27/01 



Sat 4/7/01 



Implement Use: Synchi onization Module 
Implement Server Synchronization Module 
Implement PalmOS GUI screen modules 



9 days 
9 days 
9 days 



Implement Clier? Rendezvous Amplication Module 

Implement Ul Manager Module 

Design Integration Tests 

Integration Testing 

Blackbox "esting 

User Testing 

UsBl Manual 



4 days 



7 days 



3 days 



1 day 



Sun 4/8/01 

Wed 4/1 8/01 

Sat 4/7/01 

Thu 4/1 9/01 

Mon 4/23/01 

Tue 4/24/01 

Tue 5/1/01 

Tue 5/8/01 

Fri 5/1 1/01 



Wed 4/1 8/01 

Sat 4/28/01 

Tue 4/1 1/01 

Thu 4/1 2/01 

Sun 4/1 5/01 

Fri 4/21/01 

Tue 4/24/01 

Thu 4/26/01 

Fri 4/27/01 

Sat 4/7/01 

Mon 4/1 6/01 

Thu 4/26/01 

Sun 4/1 5/01 



1 day Sat 5/1 2/01 



Sun 4/22/01 
Wed 1 0S/01 
Mon 4/31/01 

Mon 5/7/01 
Thu 5/1 1/01 

Fri 5/1-/01 
Sat 5/1 2/01 



Preseritafion Preperation 



1 day.: Mon 5/1 4/01 Mon 5/1 4701 




Figure 16.2: An example of a Gantt chart. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, 

http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



Chapter 17: Budget Planning 



Every project boils down to money. If you had a bigger budget, you could probably get 
more people to do your project more quickly and deliver more. That's why no project plan is 
complete until you come up with a budget (Figure 11.18). But no matter whether your project is 
big or small, and no matter how many resources and activities are in it, the process for figuring 
out the bottom line is always the same. 

It is important to come up with detailed estimates of all the project costs. Once this is 
obtained, add up the cost estimates into a budget plan. It is now possible to track the project 
according to that budget while the work is ongoing. 

A lot of times you come into a project and there is already an expectation of how much it 
will cost or how much time it will take. When you make an estimate really early in the project 
and you don't know much about it, that estimate is called a rough order of magnitude estimate (or 
a ballpark estimate). It's expected that this estimate will become more refined as time goes on 
and you learn more about the project. Here are some more tools and techniques used to estimate 
cost: 

Determine resource cost rates: People who will be working on the project all work at a 
specific rate. Any materials you will use to build the project (like wood or wiring) will be 
charged at a rate too. This just means figuring out what the rate for labor and materials will be. 



Vendor bid analysis: Sometimes you will need to work with an external contractor to get 
your project done. You might even have more than one contractor bid on the job. This tool is all 
about evaluating those bids and choosing the one you will go with. 

Reserve analysis: You need to set aside some money for cost overruns. If you know that 
your project has a risk of something expensive happening, better to have some cash lying around 
to deal with it. Reserve analysis means putting some cash away just in case. 

Cost of quality: You will need to figure the cost of all your quality related activities into 
the overall budget, too. Since it's cheaper to find bugs earlier in the project than later, there are 
always quality costs associated with everything your project produces. Cost of quality is just a 
way of tracking the cost of those activities and is how much money it takes to do the project 
right. 

Once you apply all the tools in this process, you will arrive at an estimate for how much 
your project will cost. It's always important to keep all of your supporting estimate information, 
too. That way, you know the assumptions you made when you were coming up with your 
numbers. Now you are ready to build your budget plan. 

Procurement management follows a logical order. First, you plan what you need to 
contract; then you plan how you'll do it. Next, you send out your contract requirements to sellers. 
They bid for the chance to work with you. You pick the best one, and then you sign the contract 
with them. Once the work begins, you monitor it to make sure that the contract is being followed. 
When the work is done, you close out the contract and fill out all the paperwork. 

You will need to start with a plan for the whole project. You need to think about all of the 
work that you will contract out for your project before you do anything else. You will want to 
plan for any purchases and acquisitions. Here's where you take a close look at your needs, to be 
sure that you really need to create a contract. You figure out what kinds of contracts make sense 
for your project, and you try to define all of the parts of your project that will be contracted out. 

Contract planning is where you plan out each individual contract for the project work. 
You work out how you to manage the contract, what metrics it will need to meet to be 
considered successful, how you'll pick a seller, and how you'll administer the contract once the 
work is happening. 

The procurement management plan details how the procurement process will be 
managed. It includes the following information: 

• The types of contracts you plan to use, and any metrics that will be used to measure 
the contractor's performance. 

• The planned delivery dates for the work or products you are contracting. 

• The company's standard documents you will use. 

• How many vendors or contractors are involved and how they will be managed. 

• How purchasing may impact the constraints and assumptions of the project plan. 



• Coordination of purchasing lead times with the development of the project schedule. 

• Identification of prequalified sellers (if known). 

The procurement management plan like all other management plans becomes a 
subsidiary of the project management plan. Some tools and techniques you may use during the 
procurement planning stage include make or buy analysis and defining the contract type. 

17.1 Make or Buy Analysis 



This means figuring out whether or not you should be contracting the work or doing it 
yourself. It could also mean deciding whether to build a solution to your problem or buy one that 
is already available. Most of the same factors that help you make every other major project 
decision will help you with this one. How much does it cost to build it as opposed to buy it? How 
will this decision affect the scope of your project? How about project schedule? Do you have 
time to do the work and still meet your commitments? As you plan out what you will and won't 
contract, you need to have thought through your reasoning pretty carefully. 

There are some resources (like heavy equipment) that your company can buy, rent, or 
lease depending on the situation. You'll need to examine leasing versus buying costs and 
determine the best way to go forward. 

17.2 Contract Types 



You should know a little bit about the major kinds of contracts available to you so that 
you choose the one that creates the most fair and workable deal for you and the contractor. Some 
contracts are fixed price: no matter how much time or effort goes into them, you always pay the 
same (Figure 17.1). Some are cost reimbursable also called cost plus (Figure 17.2). This is where 
the seller charges you for the cost of doing the work plus some fee or rate. The third major kind 
of contract is time and materials (Figure 17.3). That's where the buyer pays a rate for the time 
spent working on the project and also pays for all the materials used to do the work. 



Cost (revenue) 




Profit 



Effort 



Figure 17.1: A fixed price contract the cost (or revenue to the vendor) is constant regardless of 

effort applied or delivery date. 



Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



$$ 



Cost (revenue) 



Profit 



Effort 

Figure 17.2: In a cost reimbursable or cost plus contract, the seller is guaranteed a specific fee. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



$$ 



Cost (revenue) 




Effort 



Figure 17.3: In a time and materials contract the cost (or revenue to the vendor) increases with 

increased effort. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



Chapter 18: Risk Management Planning 



Even the most carefully planned project can run into trouble. No matter how well you 
plan, your project can always run into unexpected problems. Team members get sick or quit, 
resources that you were depending on turn out to be unavailable, even the weather can throw you 
for a loop (For example, Hurricane Ike). So does that mean that you're helpless against unknown 
problems? No! You can use risk planning to identify potential problems that could cause trouble 
for your project, analyze how likely they'll occur, take action to prevent the risks you can avoid, 
and minimize the ones that you can't. 

A risk is any uncertain event or condition that might affect your project. Not all risks are 
negative. Some events (like finding an easier way to do an activity) or conditions (like lower 
prices for certain materials) can help your project. When this happens, we call it an opportunity; 
but it's still handled just like a risk. 

There are no guarantees on any project. Even the simplest activity can turn into 
unexpected problems. Any time there's anything that might occur on your project and change the 
outcome of a project activity, we call that a risk. A risk can be an event (like a hurricane) or it 
can be a condition (like an important part being unavailable). Either way, it's something that may 
or may not happen ...but if it does, then it will force you to change the way you and your team 
will work on the project. 

If your project requires that you stand on the edge of a cliff, then there's a risk that you 
could fall (Figure 18. 1). If it's very windy out or if the ground is slippery and uneven, then falling 
is more likely. 








Your project 



Avoid 



Mitigate 



Transfer 



Accept 



Figure 18.1 Potential ways to handle risk in a project. 

Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 

When you're planning your project, risks are still uncertain: they haven't happened yet. 
But eventually, some of the risks that you plan do happen. And that's when you have to deal with 
them. There are four basic ways to handle a risk. 



1. Avoid: The best thing that you can do with a risk is to avoid it. If you can prevent it from 
happening, it definitely won't hurt your project. The easiest way to avoid this risk is to 
walk away from the cliff (Figure 18.1), but that may not be an option on this project. 

2. Mitigate: If you can't avoid the risk, you can mitigate it. This means taking some sort of 
action that will cause it to do as little damage to your project as possible (Figure 18. 1). 

3. Transfer: One effective way to deal with a risk is to pay someone else to accept it for you 
(Figure 18.1). The most common way to do this is to buy insurance. 

4. Accept: When you can't avoid, mitigate, or transfer a risk, then you have to accept it 
(Figure 18.1). But even when you accept a risk, at least you've looked at the alternatives 
and you know what will happen of it occurs. If you can't avoid the risk, and there's 
nothing you can do to reduce its impact, then accepting it is your only choice. 



By the time a risk actually occurs on your project, it's too late to do anything about it. 
That's why you need to plan for risks from the beginning and keep coming back to do more 
planning throughout the project. 

The risk management plan tells you how you're going to handle risk in your project. It 
documents how you'll access risk on the project, who is responsible for doing it, and how often 
you'll do risk planning (since you'll have to meet about risk planning with your team throughout 
the project.) 

The plan has parts that are really useful for managing risks. 

Here are some risk categories that you'll use to classify your risks. Some risks are 
technical, like a component that might turn out to be difficult to use. Others are external, like 
changes in the market or even problems with the weather. 

Risk breakdown structure (RBS) is a great tool for managing your risk categories. It 
looks like a WBS, except instead of tasks it shows how the risks break down into categories. 

It's important to come up with guidelines to help you figure out how big a risk's impact is. 
The impact tells you how much damage the risk will cause to your project. A lot of projects 
classify impact on a scale from minimal to severe, or from very low to very high. The plan 
should also give you a scale to help figure out the probability of the risk. Some risks are very 
likely; others aren't. 



Chapter 19: Quality Planning 

It's not enough to make sure you get it done on time and under budget. You need to be 
sure you make the right product to suit your stakeholders' needs. Quality means making sure that 
you build what you said you would and that you do it as efficiently as you can. That means 
trying not to make too many mistakes and always keeping your project working toward the goal 
of creating the right product. 

Everybody "knows" what quality is. But the way the word is used in everyday life is a 
little different that how it is used in project management. Just like the triple constraint, scope, 
cost, and schedule-you manage quality on your project by setting goals and taking 
measurements. That's why you need to understand the quality levels your stakeholders believe 
are acceptable, and that your projects meet those targets; just like it needs to meet their budget 
and schedule goals. 

Customer satisfaction is about making sure that the people who are paying for the end 
product are happy with what they get. When the team gathers requirements for the specification, 
they try to write down all of the things that the customers want in the product so that you know 
how to make them happy. Some requirements can be left unstated, too. Those are the ones that 
are implied by the customer's explicit needs. For example: some requirements are just common 
sense, like a product that people hold can't be made from toxic chemicals that may kill you. It 
might not be stated, but it's definitely a requirement. 

Fitness to use is about making sure that the product you build has the best design possible 
to fit the customer's needs. Which would you choose: a product that's beautifully designed, well 
constructed, solidly built and all around pleasant to look at but does not do what you need, or a 
product that does what you want despite being really ugly and hard to use? You'll always choose 
the product that fits your needs, even if it's seriously limited. That's why it's important that the 
product both does what it is supposed to do and does it well. For example: you could pound in a 
nail with a screwdriver, but a hammer is better fit for the job. 

Conformance to requirements is the core of both customer satisfaction and fitness to use, 
and is a measure of how well your product does what you intend. Above all, your product needs 
to do what you wrote down in your requirements document. Your requirements should take into 
account what will satisfy your customer and the best design possible for the job. That means 
conforming to both stated and implied requirements. 

In the end, your product's quality is judged by whether you built what you said you would 
build 

Quality planning focuses on taking all of the information available to you at the 
beginning of your project and figuring out how you will measure your quality and prevent 
defects. Your company should have a quality policy that tells how it measures quality across the 
organization. You should make sure your project follows the company policy and any 
governmental rules or regulations on how you need to plan quality for your project. 

You need to plan out which activities you're going to use to measure the quality of the 
product of your project. And you need to be sure the activities you plan are going to pay off in 



the end. So you'll need to think about the cost of all the quality-related activities you want to do. 
Then you'll need to set some guidelines for what you going to measure against. Finally, you'll 
need to design the tests you're going to run when the product is ready to be tested. 

19.1 Quality planning tools 



The following represents the quality planning tools available to the project manager. 

• Cost benefit analysis is looking at how much your quality activities will cost versus 
how much you will gain from doing them. The costs are easy to measure; the effort 
and resources it takes to do them are just like any other task on your schedule. Since 
quality activities don't actually produce a product, it is harder for people to measure 
the benefit sometimes. The main benefits are less re-work, higher productivity and 
efficiency and more satisfaction from both the team and the customer. 

• Benchmarking means using the results of quality planning on other projects to set 
goals for your own. You might find that the last project in your company had 20% 
fewer defects than the one before it. You should want to learn from a project like that 
and put in practice any of the ideas they used to make such a great improvement. 
Benchmarks can give you some reference points for judging your own project before 
you even get started with the work. 

• Design of experiments is the list of all the kinds of tests you are going to run on your 
product. It might list all the kinds of test procedures you'll do, the approaches you'll 
take, and even the tests themselves. (In the software world, this is called test 
planning). 

• Cost of quality is what you get when you add up the cost of all the prevention and 
inspection activities you are going to do on your project. It doesn't just include the 
testing. It includes any time spent writing standards, reviewing documents, meeting to 
analyze the root causes of defects, re-work to fix the defects once they're found by the 
team; absolutely everything you do to ensure quality on the project. 

• Cost of quality can be a good number to check whether your project is doing well or 
having trouble. Say your company tracks cost of quality on all of its projects. Then 
you could tell if you were spending more or less than they are to get your project up 
to quality standards. 

Once you have your quality plan, you know your guidelines for managing quality on your 
project. Your strategies for monitoring your project quality should be included in the plan, as 
well as the reasons for all the steps you are taking. It's important that everyone on the team 
understand the rationale behind the metrics being used to judge success or failure of the project. 



Chapter 20: Communication Planning 

Communications management is about keeping everybody in the loop. Have you ever 
tried talking to someone in a really loud, crowded room? That's what running a project is like if 
you don't get a handle on communications. The communications planning process concerns 
defining the types of information you're going to deliver, to whom, the format for 
communicating the information and when. It turns out that 90% of a project manager's job is 
spent on communication so it's important to make sure everybody gets the right message at the 
right time. 

The first step in defining your communication plan is figuring out what kind of 
communication your stakeholders need from the project so that they can make good decisions. 
This is called the communications requirements analysis. Your project will produce a lot of 
information; you don't want to overwhelm your stakeholders with all of it. Your job here is to 
figure out what they feel is valuable. Communicating valuable information doesn't mean you 
always paint a rosy picture. Communications to stakeholders may consist of either good news or 
bad news-the point is that you don't want to bury stakeholders in too much information but give 
them enough so that they're informed and can make appropriate decisions. 

Communications technology has a major impact on how you can keep people in the loop. 
This examines the methods (or technology) used to communicate the information to, from and 
among the stakeholders. Methods of communicating can take many forms, such as written, 
spoken, e-mail, formal status reports, meetings, online databases, online schedules, project 
websites and so forth. You should consider several factors before deciding what methods you'll 
choose to transfer information. The timing of the information exchange or need for updates is the 
first factor. It's a lot easier for people to get information on their projects if it's accessible through 
a web site, than if all your information is passed around by paper memos. Do you need to 
procure new technology or systems, or are there systems already in place that will work? The 
technologies available to you will definitely figure into your plan of how you will keep everyone 
notified of project status and issues. Staff experience with the technology is another factor. Are 
there project team members and stakeholders experienced at using this technology, or will you 
need to train them? Finally, consider the duration of the project and the project environment. 
Will the technology you're choosing work throughout the life of the project or will it have to be 
upgraded or updated at some point? And how does the project team function? Are they located 
together or spread out across several campuses or locations? 

The answers to these questions should be documented in the communication plan. 

All projects require sound communication plan, but not all projects will have the same 
types of communication or the same methods for distrusting the information. The 
communication plan documents the types of information needs the stakeholders have, when the 
information should be distributed and how the information will be delivered. 

The type of information you will typically communicate includes project status, project 
scope statements, and scope statement updates, project baseline information, risks, action items, 
performance measures, project acceptance and so on. What's important to know now is that the 
information needs of the stakeholders should be determined as early in the planning phase of the 



project management lifecycle as possible so that as you and your team develop project planning 
documents, you already know who should receive copies of them and how they should be 
delivered. 



Chapter 21 : Bringing it all together 

Believe it or not, we have officially completed the planning phase of the project 
management lifecycle. The project plan is the approved, formal, documented plan that's used to 
guide you throughout the project implementation phase. The plan is made up of all the processes 
of the planning phase. It is the map that tells you where you're going and how to perform the 
activities of the project plan during the project implementation phase. It serves several purposes; 
the most important of which is tracking and measuring project performance. The project plan is 
critical in all communications you'll have from here forward with the stakeholders, management, 
and customers. The project plan encompasses everything we talked about up to now and is 
represented in a formal document or collection of documents. This document contains the project 
scope, deliverables, assumptions, risks, WBS, milestones, project schedule, resources, 
communication plan, the project budget and any procurement needs. It becomes the baseline 
you'll use to measure and track progress against. It is also used to help you control the 
components that tend to stray away from the original plan so you can get them back on track. 

The project plan is used as a communication and information tool for stakeholders, team 
members and the management team. They will use the project plan to review and gauge progress 
as well. Your last step in the planning phase is obtaining sign-off of the project plan from 
stakeholders, the sponsor and the management team. If they've been an integral part of the 
planning processes all along (and I know you know how important this is), obtaining sign-off of 
the project plan should simply be a formality. 




Part IV - IMPLEMENTATION and CLOSING 




Waning Moon Copyright CC BY ChuckThePhotographer 
www.flickr.eom/photos/chuckthephotographer/2300242223/sizes/m/in/photostream/ 



Chapter 22: Project Implementation Overview 



After you have carefully planned your project, you will be ready to start the project 
implementation phase, the third phase of the project management life cycle. The implementation 
phase involves putting the project plan into action. It's here that the project manager will 
coordinate and direct project resources to meet the objectives of the project plan. As the project 
unfolds, it's the project manager's job to direct and manage each activity on the project, every 
step of the way. That's what happens in the implementation phase of the project lifecycle; you 
simply follow the plan you've put together and handle any problems that come up. 

The implementation phase is where you and your project team actually do the project 
work to produce the deliverables. The word deliverable means anything your project delivers. 
The deliverables for your project include all of the products or services that you and your team 
are performing for the client, customer or sponsor including all the project management 
documents that you put together. 

The steps undertaken to build each deliverable will vary depending on the type of project 
you are undertaking, and cannot therefore be described here in any real detail. For instance 
engineering and telecommunications projects will focus on using equipment, resources and 
materials to construct each project deliverable, whereas computer software projects may require 
the development and implementation of software code routines to produce each project 
deliverable. The activities required to build each deliverable will be clearly specified within the 
project requirements document and project plan accordingly. 

Your job as project manager is to direct the work, but you need to do more than deliver 
the results. You also need to keep track of how well your team performed. The executing phase 
keeps the project plan on track with careful monitoring and control processes to ensure the final 
deliverable meets the acceptance criteria set by the customer. This phase is typically where 
approved changes are implemented. 

Most often changes are identified through looking at performance and quality control 
data. Routine performance and quality control measurements should be evaluated on a regular 
basis throughout the implementation phase. Gathering reports on those measurements will help 
you determine where the problem is and recommend changes to fix it. 

22.1 Change control 



When you find a problem, you can't just make a change, because what if it's too 
expensive, or will it take too long? You will need to look at how it affects the triple constraint 
(time, cost, scope) and how they impact quality. You will then have to figure out if it is worth 
making the change. Change control is a set of procedures that let you make changes in an 
organized way. 

Anytime you need to make a change to your plan, you need to start with a change request 
(Figure 22.1). This is a document that either you or the person making the request needs to 
create. Any change to your project needs to be documented so you can figure out what needs to 
be done, by when, and by whom. 



Once the change request is documented, it is submitted to a change control board. A 
change control board is a group of people who consider changes for approval. Not every change 
control system has a board but most do. The change request could also be submitted to the 
project sponsor or management for review and approval. Putting the recommended changes 
through change control will help you evaluate the impact and update all the necessary 
documents. Not all changes are approved, but if the changes and repairs are approved, you send 
them back to the team to put them in place. 

The implementation phase will use the most project time and resources and as a result, 
costs are usually the highest during the executing phase. Project managers will also experience 
the greatest confects over schedules in this phase. You may find as your monitoring your project, 
the actual time it is taking to do the scheduled work is taking longer than the amount of time you 
planned. If you evaluate the impact of the change and find that it won't have an impact on the 
project triple constraint, then you can make the change without going through change control. 

When you absolutely have to meet the date and you are running behind, you can 
sometimes find ways to do activities more quickly by adding more resources to critical path 
tasks. That's called crashing. Crashing the schedule means adding resources or moving them 
around to shorten it. Crashing always costs more and doesn't always work. There's no way to 
crash a schedule without raising the overall cost of the project. So, if the budget is fixed and you 
don't have any extra money to spend, you can't use this technique. 

Sometimes you've got two activities planned to occur in sequence, but you can actually 
do them at the same time. This is called fast-tracking the project. On a software project, you 
might do both your user acceptance testing (UAT) and your functional testing at the same time, 
for example. This is pretty risky. There's a good chance you might need to redo some of the work 
you have done concurrently. Crashing and fast tracking are schedule compression tools. 
Managing a schedule change means keeping all of your schedule documents up to date. That 
way, you will always be comparing your results to the correct plan. 

After the deliverables have been physically constructed and accepted by the customer, a 
phase review is carried out to determine whether the project is complete and ready for closure. 



Chapter 23: Project Completion 

Every project needs to end and that's what project completion is all about in the last phase 
of the project lifecycle. The whole point of the project is that you need to deliver what you 
promised. By making sure you delivered everything you said you would, you make sure that all 
stakeholders are satisfied and all acceptance criteria have been met. Once that happens, your 
project can finish. 

Project completion is often the most often neglected phase of all the project lifecycles. 
Once the project is over, it's easy to pack things up, throw some files in a drawer, and start 
moving right into the initiation phase of the next project. Hold on. You're not done yet. 

The key activity in project completion is gathering project records and disseminating 
information to formalize acceptance of the product, service or project as well as to perform 
project closure. As the project manager, you will need to review project documents to make 
certain they are up-to-date. For example, perhaps some scope change requests were implemented 
that changed some of the characteristics of the final product. The project information you are 
collecting during this phase should reflect the characteristics and specifications of the final 
product. Don't forget to update your resource assignments as well. Some team members will 
have come and gone over the course of the project. You need to double-check that all the 
resources and their roles and responsibilities are noted. 

Once the project outcomes are documented, you'll request formal acceptance from the 
stakeholders or customer. They're interested in knowing if the product or service of the project 
meets the objectives the project set out to accomplish. If your documentation is up-to-date, you'll 
have the project results at hand to share with them. 

23.1 Lessons learned 



Project completion is also concerned with analyzing the project management processes to 
determine their effectiveness and to document lessons learned. Lessons learned are used to 
document the successes and failures of the project. As an example, lessons learned document the 
reasons why specific corrective actions were taken, their outcomes, the causes of performance 
variances, unplanned risks that occurred, mistakes that were made and could have been avoided 
and so on. 

Unfortunately, sometimes projects do fail. There are things that can be learned from the 
failure of a project (as well from successful projects), and this information should be documented 
for future reference. Lessons learned can be some of the most valuable information you'll take 
away from any project. We can all learn from our experiences, and what better way to have more 
success on your next project than to review a similar past project's lessons learned document? 
But it is important not to forget the lessons learned. 

23.2 Contract closure 



Contracts come to a close just as projects come to a close. Contract closure is concerned 
with completing and settling the terms of the contract. It supports the project completion process 
because the contract closure process determines if the work described in the contract was 



completed accurately and satisfactorily. Keep in mind that not all projects are performed under 
contract so not all projects require the contract closure process. Obviously, this process applies 
only to those phases, deliverables or portions of the project that were performed under contract. 

Contract closure updates the project records detailing the final results of the work on the 
project. Contracts may have specific terms or conditions for completion. You should be aware of 
these terms or conditions so that project completion isn't held up because you missed an 
important detail. If you are administering the contract yourself, be sure to ask your procurement 
department if there are any special conditions that you should be aware of so that your project 
team doesn't inadvertently delay contract project closure. 

One of the purposes of contract closure process is to provide formal notice to the seller- 
usually in written form, that the deliverables are acceptable and satisfactory or have been 
rejected. If the product or service does not meet the expectations, the vendor will need to correct 
the problems before you issue a formal acceptance notice. Hopefully, quality audits have been 
performed during the course of the project and the vendor was given the opportunity to make 
corrections earlier in the process than the closing phase. It's not a good idea to wait until the very 
end of the project and then spring all the problems and issues on the vendor at once. It's much 
more efficient to discuss problems with your vendor as the project progresses because it provides 
the opportunity for correction when the problems occur. 

If the product or service does meet the project's expectation and is acceptable, formal 
written notice to the seller is required indicating that the contract is complete. This is the formal 
acceptance and closure of the contract. It's your responsibility as the project manager to 
document the formal acceptance of the contract. Many times the provisions for formalizing 
acceptance and closing the contract are spelled out in the contract itself. 

If you have a procurement department handling the contract administration, they will 
expect you to inform them when the contract is complete and will in turn follow the formal 
procedures to let the seller know the contract is complete. However, you'll still note the contract 
completion in your copy of the project records. 

23.3 Releasing project team 



Releasing project team members is not an official process. However, it should be noted 
that at the conclusion of the project, you will release your project team members, and they will 
go back to their functional managers or get assigned to a new project. You will want to keep 
their managers, or other project managers, informed as you get closer to project completion, so 
that they have time to adequately plan for the return of their employees. Let them know a few 
months ahead of time what the schedule looks like and how soon they can plan on using their 
employees on new projects. This gives the other managers the ability to start planning activities 
and scheduling activity dates. 

23.4 Celebrate! 



The project team should celebrate their accomplishments, and the project manager should 
officially recognize their efforts and thank them for their participation and officially close the 
project. A celebration helps team members formally recognize the project's end and brings 
closure to the work they've done. It also encourages them to remember what they've learned and 
to start thinking about how their experiences will benefit them and the organization during the 



next project (Figure 23.1). 




Figure 23.1: Celebrate! Your project is over... at least until the next one. 

Photo from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



Appendix A: Solutions to Exercises 

Solution to Exercise 10.1 

The floor and all furniture will be covered by drop cloths prior to painting each of the 
four office walls, not including the door, base-boards, crown molding, window frames, windows, 
light switches, or power outlets that will be masked with painters tape. The walls should be 
painted using Behr paint in Sapphire Berry #550C-2 in the semi-gloss sheen, using a 
nylon/polyester 3" inch wide brush and a vertical brush stroke. Two coats of paint should be 
applied, allowing 16 hours between coats, and the painting should be completed by Friday, 
November 7, including removal of all protective tape and drop cloths. 

Of course, this assumes the contractor knows which office to paint! 

Solution to Exercise 15.1 

• Invitations 

o Create guest list 

o Print the invitations 

o Mail the invitations 

o Wait for RSVPs 

• Food 

o Find caterer 

o Finalize the menu 

o Cater the wedding 

• Bridal 

o Shop for dress 

o Shop for shoes 

o Choose the bouquet 

o Tailoring and fitting 



In pictorial format: 



0.0 Wedding 



1.0 Invitations 



2.0 Food 



1.1 Create guest list 



1.3 Mail the invitations 



2.1 Find caterer 



2.3 Cater wedding 



1 .4 Wait for RSVPs 



3.0 Bridal 



■* 3.1 Shop for dress 



1.2 Print the invitations +. 2 .2 Finalize menu * 3.2 Shop for shoes 



3.3 Choose bouquet 



3.4 Tailoring and fitting 



Illustration from Barron & Barron Project Management for Scientists and Engineers, http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



Solutions to Exercises in Chapter 16 



• Solution to Exercise 16.1 


• Alternative analysis. 


• Solution to Exercise 16.2 


• Published estimating data. 


• Solution to Exercise 16.3 


• Expert judgment. 


• Solution to Exercise 16.4 


• Project management software 


• Solution to Exercise 16.5 


• Bottom-up estimating 


• Solution to Exercise 16.6 


• Alternative analysis 


• Solution to Exercise 16.7 


• Expert judgment. 


• Solution to Exercise 16.8 


• Expert judgment. 


• Solution to Exercise 16.9 


• Parametric estimating. 


• Solution to Exercise 16.10 


• Analogous estimating. 



Appendix B: Glossary of Project Management Terms 



Assumption - There may be external circumstances or events that must occur for the project to 
be successful (or that should happen to increase your chances of success). If you believe that the 
probability of the event occurring is acceptable, you could list it as an assumption. An 
assumption has a probability between and 100%. That is, it is not impossible that the event will 
occur (0%) and it is not a fact (100%). It is somewhere in between. Assumptions are important 
because they set the context in which the entire remainder of the project is defined. If an 
assumption doesn't come through, the estimate and the rest of the project definition may no 
longer be valid. 

BAC - Budget at completion (BAC) is the sum of all budgets allocated to a project. 

Backward pass - Calculation of the latest finish times by working from finish-to- start for the 
uncompleted portion of a network of activities. 

Balanced matrix - An organizational matrix where functions and projects have the same 
priority. 

Bar chart - A view of the project schedule that uses horizontal bars on a time scale to depict 
activity information; frequently called a Gantt chart. 

Baseline - The value or condition against which all future measurements will be compared. 

Baseline cost - The amount of money an activity was intended to cost when the baseline plan 
was established. 

Baseline dates - Original planned start and finish dates for an activity that is used to compare 
with current planned dates to determine any delays; also used to calculate budgeted cost of work 
scheduled in earned value analysis 

Baseline plan - The original plan (for a project, a work package, or an activity), plus or minus 
approved changes. Usually used with a modifier, e.g., cost baseline, schedule baseline, 
performance measurement baseline, etc. 

Best practices - Techniques that agencies may use to help detect problems in the acquisition, 
management, and administration of service contracts; best practices are practical techniques 
gained from experience that have been shown to produce best results. 

Beta testing - Pre-release testing in which a sampling of the intended customer base tries out the 
product. 

Bottom-up cost estimate - The approach to making a cost estimate or plan in which detailed 
estimates are made for every task shown in the work breakdown structure and then summed to 
provide a total cost estimate or plan for the project. 

Brainstorming - The unstructured and dynamic generation of ideas by a group of people where 
anything and everything is acceptable, it is particularly useful in generating a list of potential 
project risks. 



Budget - Generally refers to a list of all planned expenses and revenues. 

Budgeted cost of work performed (BCWP) - Measures the budgeted cost of work that has 
actually been performed rather than the cost of work scheduled 

Budgeted cost of work scheduled (BCWS) - The approved budget that has been allocated to 
complete a scheduled task, or work breakdown structure (WBS) component, during a specific 
time period 

Business analysis - The set of tasks, knowledge, and techniques required to identify business 
needs and determine solutions to business problems. Solutions often include a systems 
development component, but may also consist of process improvement or organizational change. 

Business area - The part of the organization containing the business operations affected by a 
program or project 

Business case - A document developed towards the end of the concept phase, to establish the 
merits and desirability of the project and justification for further project definition. 

Business needs - The requirements of an enterprise to meet its goals and objectives. 

Business operations - The ongoing recurring activities involved in the running of a business for 
the purpose of producing value for the stakeholders. They are contrasted with project 
management, and consist of business processes. 

Business process - A collection of related, structured activities or tasks that produce a specific 
service or product (serve a particular goal) for a particular customer or customers. There are 
three types of business processes: management processes, operational processes, and supporting 
processes. 

Case study - A research method that involves an in-depth, longitudinal examination of a single 
instance or event: a case. It provides a systematic way of looking at events, collecting data, 
analyzing information, and reporting the results. 

Champion - An end-user representative, often seconded into a project team. Someone who acts 
as an advocate for a proposal or project. 

Change control - A general term describing the procedures used to ensure that changes 
(normally, but not necessarily, to IT systems) are introduced in a controlled and coordinated 
manner. Change control is a major aspect of the broader discipline of change management. 

Change management - The formal process through which changes to the project plan are 
approved and introduced. 

Change order - A document that authorizes a change in some aspect of the project. 

Change request - A request needed to obtain formal approval for changes to the scope, design, 
methods, costs, or planned aspects of a project. Change requests may arise through changes in 
the business or issues in the project. Change requests should be logged, assessed and agreed-on 
before a change to the project can be made. 

Child activity - Subordinate task belonging to a parent task existing at a higher level in the work 
breakdown structure. 

Client/customers - The person or group that is the direct beneficiary of a project or service is the 
client/customer. These are the people for whom the project is being undertaken (indirect 



beneficiaries are stakeholders). In many organizations, internal beneficiaries are called clients 
and external beneficiaries are called customers, but this is not a hard and fast rule. 

Completion - The completion of all work on a project. 

Communication plan - A statement of the project's stakeholders' communication and 
information needs. 

Concept phase - The first phase of a project in the generic project lifecycle, in which the need is 
examined, alternatives are assessed, the goals and objectives of the project are established, and a 
sponsor is identified. 

Confidence level - A level of confidence, stated as a percentage, for a budget or schedule 
estimate. The higher the confidence level, the lower the risk. 

Conflict management - Handling of conflicts between project participants or groups in order to 
create optimal project results. 

Conflict resolution - The solution to a problem, using one of five methods in particular: 
confrontation, compromise, smoothing, forcing and withdrawal. 

Constraints - Limitations that are outside the control of the project team and need to be 
managed around. They are not necessarily problems. However, the project manager should be 
aware of constraints because they represent limitations within which the project must be 
executed. Date constraints, for instance, imply that certain events (perhaps the end of the project) 
must occur by certain dates. Resources are almost always a constraint, since they are not 
available in an unlimited supply. 

Contingencies - The planned allotment of time and cost for unforeseeable elements in a project. 
Including contingencies will increase the confidence of the overall project. 

Control - The process of comparing actual performance with planned performance, analyzing 
the differences, and taking the appropriate corrective action. 

Costs - The cost value of project activity. 

Costs budgeting - The allocation of cost estimates to individual project components. 

Cost overrun - The amount by which actual costs exceed the baseline or approved costs. 

Crashing - The process of reducing the time it takes to complete an activity by adding resources. 

Critical - An activity or event that, if delayed, will delay some other important event, commonly 
the completion of a project or a major milestone in a project. 

Critical path - The critical path is the sequence of activities that must be completed on-schedule 
for the entire project to be completed on schedule. It is the longest duration path through the 
work plan. For example, if an activity on the critical path is delayed by one day, the entire 
project will be delayed by one day (unless another activity on the critical path can be accelerated 
by one day). 



Critical path method (CPM) - A mathematically based modeling technique for scheduling a set 
of project activities. 

Critical chain project management (CCPM) - A method of planning and managing projects 
that puts more emphasis on the resources required to execute project tasks. 

Critical success factors - The key factors that are deemed critical to the success of the project. 
The nature of these factors will govern the response to conflicts, risks and the setting of 
priorities. 

Culture - A person's attitudes arising out of their professional, religious, class, educational, 
gender, age and other backgrounds. 

Customer - See client. 

Deliverable - A deliverable is any tangible outcome that is produced by the project. All projects 
create deliverables. These can be documents, plans, computer systems, buildings, aircraft, etc. 
Internal deliverables are produced as a consequence of executing the project and are usually 
needed only by the project team. External deliverables are those that are created for clients and 
stakeholders. Your project may create one or many deliverables. 

Dependency - Dependencies are the relationships between activities whereby one activity must 
do something (finish-to-start) before another activity can do something (start-to-finish). 

Duration - The duration of a project's terminal element is the number of calendar periods it takes 
from the time the implementation of an element starts to the moment it is completed. 

Earned value management (EVM) - A project management technique for measuring project 
progress in an objective manner, measuring scope, schedule, and cost combined in a single 
integrated system. 

Earned schedule (ES) - An extension to earned value management (EVM), which renames two 
traditional measures to indicate clearly they are in units of currency or quantity, not time. 

Estimation - The processes of making accurate estimates using the appropriate techniques 

Event chain diagram - A diagram that shows the relationships between events and tasks and 
how the events affect each other 

Event chain methodology - An uncertainty modeling and schedule network analysis technique 
that is focused on identifying and managing events and event chains that affect project schedules 

Float - The amount of time that a task in a project network can be delayed without causing a 
delay to subsequent tasks and/or the project completion date 

Functional manager - The person you report to within your functional organization. Typically, 
this is the person who does your performance review. The project manager may also be a 
functional manager, but he or she does not have to be. If your project manager is different from 
your functional manager, your organization is probably utilizing matrix management. 

Gantt, Henry - An American mechanical engineer and management consultant who developed 
the Gantt chart in the 1910' s 

Gantt chart - A Gantt chart is a bar chart that depicts activities as blocks over time. The 
beginning and end of the block correspond to the beginning and end-date of the activity. 



Goal - An objective that consists of a projected state of affairs which a person or a system plans 
or intends to achieve or bring about. A personal or organizational desired end-point in some sort 
of assumed development. Many people endeavor to reach goals within a finite time by setting 
goals. 

Goal setting - Involves establishing specific, measurable and time-targeted objectives. 

Graphical evaluation and review technique (GERT) - A network analysis technique that 
allows probabilistic treatment of both network logic and activity duration estimation 

Hammock activity - A schedule or project planning term for a grouping of subtasks that hang 
between two end dates to which they are tied or the two end events to which they are fixed 

ISO 10006 - A guideline for quality management in projects, it is an international standard 
developed by the International Organization for Standardization. 

Issue - An issue is a major problem that will impede the progress of the project that can't be 
resolved by the project manager and project team without outside help. Project managers should 
proactively deal with issues through a defined issues management process. 

Kickoff meeting - The first meeting with the project team and the client of the project 

Level of effort (LOE) - A support-type activity which doesn't lend itself to measurement of a 
discrete accomplishment. Examples may be project budget accounting, customer liaison, etc. 

Life cycle - The process used to build the deliverables produced by the project. Every project has 
an inception, a period during which activities move the project toward completion, and a 
termination (either successful or unsuccessful). 

Management - Management comprises planning, organizing, staffing, leading or directing, and 
controlling an organization (a group of one or more people or entities) or effort for the purpose 
of accomplishing a goal. 

Management process - A process of planning and controlling the performance or 
implementation of any type of activity 

Motivation - The reasons that entice one to engage in a particular behavior 

Milestone - A scheduling event that signifies the completion of a major deliverable or a set of 
related deliverables. A milestone, by definition, has a duration of zero and no effort. There is no 
work associated with a milestone. It is a flag in the work plan to signify that some other work has 
been completed. Usually, a milestone is used as a project checkpoint to validate how the project 
is progressing. In many cases there is a decision, such as validating that the project is ready to 
proceed further, that needs to be made at a milestone. 

Objective - A concrete statement that describes what the project is trying to achieve. The 
objective should be written at a low level so that it can be evaluated at the conclusion of a project 
to see whether it was achieved. Project success is determined based on whether or not the project 
objectives were achieved. A technique for writing an objective is to make sure it is specific, 
measurable, acceptable, realistic, and time-based (SMART). 

Operations management - An area of business that is concerned with the production of good 
quality goods and services, and involves responsibility for ensuring that business operations are 
efficient and effective. It is the management of resources, the distribution of goods and services 
to customers, and the analysis of queue systems. 



Organization - A social arrangement that pursues collective goals, controls its own 
performance, and has a boundary separating it from its environment. 

Planning - Processes that involve formulating and revising project goals and objectives and 
creating the project management plan that will be used to achieve the goals the project was 
undertaken to address. Planning involves determining alternative courses of action and selecting 
from among the best of those to produce the project's goals. 

Process - An ongoing collection of activities, with inputs, outputs and the energy required to 
transform inputs to outputs. 

Program - The umbrella structure established to manage a series of related projects. The 
program does not produce any project deliverables; the project teams produce them all. The 
purpose of the program is to provide overall direction and guidance, to make sure the related 
projects are communicating effectively, to provide a central point of contact and focus for the 
client and project teams, and to determine how individual projects should be defined to ensure 
that all the work gets completed successfully. 

Program management - The process of managing multiple, ongoing, inter-dependent projects. 
An example would be that of designing, manufacturing and providing support infrastructure for 
an automobile manufacturer. 

Program manager - The person with the authority to manage a program. (Note that this is a 
role. The program manager may also be responsible for one or more projects within the 
program.) The program manager leads the overall planning and management of the program. All 
project managers within the program report to the program manager. 

Project - A project is a temporary endeavor undertaken to accomplish a unique product or 
service with a defined start and end point and specific objectives that, when attained, signify 
completion. 

Project definition (project charter) - Before you start a project, it is important to know the 
overall objectives of the project, as well as the scope, deliverables, risks, assumptions, project 
organization chart, etc. The project definition (or project charter) is the document that holds this 
relevant information. The project manager is responsible for creating the project definition. The 
document should be approved by the sponsor to signify that the project manager and the sponsor 
are in agreement on these important aspects of the project. 

Project manager - The person with the authority to manage a project. The project manager is 
100 percent responsible for the processes used to manage the project. He or she also has people 
management responsibilities for team members, although this is shared with the team member's 
functional manager. The processes a project manager might perform include defining the work, 
building the work plan and budget, managing the work plan and budget, scope management, 
issues management, risk management, etc. 

Project management - The application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques applied to 
project activities in order to meet or exceed stakeholder needs and expectations from a project. 

Project management body of knowledge (PMBOK) - The sum of knowledge within the 
profession of project management that is standardized by ISO. 

Project management professional - A certificated professional in project management (PMP). 



Project management software - Software that includes scheduling, cost control and budget 
management, resource allocation, collaboration tools, communication, quality management, and 
documentation systems, which are used to deal with the complexity of large projects. 

Project phase - A major logical grouping of work on a project, it also represents the completion 
of a major deliverable or set of related deliverables. On an IT development project, logical 
project phases might be planning, analysis, design, construction (including testing), and 
implementation. 

Project plan - A formal, approved document used to guide both project implementation and 
project control. The primary uses of the project plan are to document planning assumptions and 
decisions, facilitate communication among stakeholders, and document approved scope, cost, 
and schedule baselines. There are two types of project plans: summary or detailed. 

Project planning - The use of schedules such as Gantt charts to plan and subsequently report 
progress within the project environment. 

Project team - Full and part-time resources assigned to work on project deliverables. They are 
responsible for understanding the work to be completed; completing assigned work within the 
budget, timeline, and quality expectations; informing the project manager of issues, scope 
changes, and risk and quality concerns; and proactively communicating status and managing 
expectations. 

Quality - The standards and criteria to which the project's products must be delivered for them to 
perform effectively. First, the product must perform to provide the functionality expected, solve 
the problem, and deliver the benefit and value expected of it. It must also meet other 
performance requirements, or service levels, such as availability, reliability and maintainability, 
and have acceptable finish and polish. Quality on a project is controlled through quality 
assurance (QA), which is the process of evaluating overall project performance on a regular basis 
to provide confidence that the project will satisfy the relevant quality standards. 

Requirements - Descriptions of how a product or service should act, appear, or perform and 
which generally refer to the features and functions of the project deliverables being built. 
Requirements are considered to be a part of project scope. High-level scope is defined in your 
project definition (charter). The requirements form the detailed scope. After your requirements 
are approved, they can be changed through the scope change management process. 

Resources - Resources are the people, equipment, and materials needed to complete the work of 
the project. 

Risk - There may be potential external events that will have a negative impact on your project if 
they occur. Risk refers to the combination of probability that these events will occur and the 
impact on the project if they do. If the combination of the probability of the event and the impact 
to the project is too high, you should identify the potential event as a risk and put a proactive 
plan in place to manage it. 

Risk management planning - Determines how risks will be managed for a project and describes 
how risks are defined, monitored, and controlled throughout the project. 

Schedule development - Calculates and prepares the schedule of project activities which 
becomes the schedule baseline. It determines activity start and finish dates, finalizes activity 
sequences and durations, and assigns resources to activities. 



Scope - Describes the boundaries of the project. It defines what the project will deliver and what 
it will not. 

Scope creep - Refers to uncontrolled changes in a project's scope. This phenomenon can occur 
when the scope of a project is not properly defined, documented, or controlled. It is generally 
considered a negative occurrence to be avoided. 

Six sigma - A business management strategy, originally developed by Motorola, that today 
enjoys widespread application in many sectors of industry. 

Sponsor (executive sponsor and project sponsor) - The person who has ultimate authority over 
the project. The executive sponsor provides project funding, resolves issues and scope changes, 
approves major deliverables, and provides high-level direction. He or she also champions the 
project within the organization. Depending on the project and the organizational level of the 
executive sponsor, he or she may delegate day-to-day tactical management to a project sponsor. 
If assigned, the project sponsor represents the executive sponsor on a day-to-day basis and makes 
most of the decisions requiring sponsor approval. If the decision is large enough, the project 
sponsor will take it to the executive sponsor. 

Stakeholder - Specific people or groups who have a stake in the outcome of the project are 
stakeholders. Normally stakeholders are from within the company and may include internal 
clients, management, employees, administrators, etc. A project can also have external 
stakeholders, including suppliers, investors, community groups, and government organizations. 

Steering committee - This is usually a group of high-level stakeholders who are responsible for 
providing guidance on overall strategic direction. They don't take the place of a sponsor, but help 
spread the strategic input and buy-in to a larger portion of the organization. The steering 
committee is especially valuable if your project has an impact on multiple organizations because 
it allows input from those organizations into decisions that affect them. 

Systems development lifecycle (SDLC) - Any logical process used by a systems analyst to 
develop an information system, including requirements, validation, training, and user ownership. 
An SDLC should result in a high-quality system that meets or exceeds customer expectations, 
within time and cost estimates, works effectively and efficiently in the current and planned 
information technology (IT) infrastructure, and is cheap to maintain and cost-effective to 
enhance. 

Task - An activity that needs to be accomplished within a defined period of time 

Task analysis - The analysis or breakdown of exactly how a task is accomplished, including 
what sub-tasks are required. 

Timeline - A graphical representation of a chronological sequence of events, also referred to as a 
chronology. It can also mean a schedule of activities, such as a timetable. 

Triple constraint - Called the scope triangle or quality triangle, triple constraint illustrates the 
relationship between three primary forces in a project: scope, time and cost. Project quality is 
sometimes considered the fourth constraint or included in scope. 

Work - The amount of effort applied to produce a deliverable or accomplish a task (a terminal 
element). 



Work breakdown structure (WBS) - A task-oriented, family tree of activities which organizes, 
defines and graphically displays the total work to be accomplished in order to achieve the final 
objectives of a project. A system for sub-dividing a project into manageable work packages. 

Work package - A deliverable at the lowest level of a work breakdown structure (WBS), they 
are a group of related tasks defined at the same level within the WBS. 

Work plan (schedule) - Allows the project manager to identify the work required to complete 
the project and to monitor the work to determine whether the project is on schedule. It describes 
the activities required, the sequence of the work, who is assigned to the work, an estimate of how 
much effort is required, when the work is due, and other information of interest to the project 
manager. 



Appendix C: Attributions and Bibliography 



Based on Project Management for Scientists and Engineers by 

Merrie Barron and Andrew Barron 
http://cnx.org/content/coll 1 120/1.4/ 



Significant contributions from the following sources 

Maura Irene Jones, Career Descriptions in Chapter 1 
Several photographs Copyright © 201 1 by Maura Irene Jones 
Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 CC BY 
Attribution URL http://www.linkedin.com/in/maurajones 

Randy Fisher, Chapter 12 

(a subset of Organization Management and Development at http://wikieducator.org/OMD/Culture_PM) 

Rekha Raman, Microsoft Word template and formatting 

Ali Daimee, syllabus and more 

Mike Milos, syllabus 

Shuly Cooper, reviews 

Bob Sawyer, Project Manager for the Saylor Foundation proposal 

Victor Cesena, Project Manager for the bound textbook 

Jim Huether, Program Manager 

Jacky Hood, Managing Editor 

Dalvinder Singh, Copy Editor 

Daria Hemming, Copy Editor 

References in the Barron & Barron textbook: 

CHAOS 2009 Summary and EPPM Study. The Standish Group, Boston, MA (2009). 

J. Westland. The Project Management Lifecycle. Kogan Page Limited (2006). 

J. Green and A. Stellman. Head First PMP. O'Reilly Media, CA (2007). 

K. Heldman, C. Baca, and P. Jansen. Project Manager Professional Study Guide., Wiley 
Publishing, Inc. NJ (1995). 



Reference for Chapter 1: Occupational Outlook Handbook (OOH), 2010-11 Edition 

References for Chapter 12 

Casmir, Michael J. (2008). Culture and the Changing Environment. 

Connor, P. E., & Lake, L. K. (1988). Managing organizational change. New York: Praeger. 

Deal, T. E. (1985). Cultural change: Opportunity, silent killer, or metamorphosis? In R. 
Retrieved October 28, 2011 from http://cnx.org/content/ml3465/latest/ 

Dodd, C.H. (1995). Dynamics of Intercultural Communication, 4th ed., Duguque, 1A, Brown 
and Benchmark. 

Lindahl, Robert. The Role of Organizational Climate and Culture in the School Improvement 
Process: A Review of the Knowledge Base, in Connexions. Retrieved October 28, 201 1 from 
http://cnx.org/content/ml3465/latest/ 

Fontaine, G. (2005). A Self-Organization Perspective on the Impact of Local verses Global 
Assignment Strategies and Knowledge Building. International Journal of Diversity in 
Organizations, Communities and Nations, 5(1), 57-66. 

Fontaine, Gary (2005). Motivations for Going International: Profiles of Asian and American 
Foreign Study Students, Cross-Cultural Management Students and Global Managers, 
International Journal of Management. 

Hall, Edward T. (originally published 1959; 1973). The Silent Language. Anchor. 

Hall, G. E., & Hord, S. M. (2001). Implementing change: Patterns, principles, and potholes. 
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 

Johnson, D. & Johnson, F. (2005). Joining Together: Group Theory and Group Skills, Ninth 
Edition. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 

Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary (2011). Culture. Retrieved on October 28, 2011 from 
http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/culture 

Owens, R. G. (2004). Organizational behavior in education: Adaptive leadership and school 
reform (8th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 

Pelton, Robert Young (2003). The World's Most Dangerous Places, Collins; 5th Rev edition. 

Rousseau, D. M. (1990). Assessing organizational culture: The case for multiple methods. In B. 
Schneider (Ed.), Organizational climate and culture (pp. 153 - 192). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Schein, E. H. (1984, Summer). Suppose we took culture seriously. Academy of Management OD 
Newsletter, 2ff. 

Schein, E. H. (1985a). How culture forms, develops, and changes. In R. H. Kilman, M.J. 

Saxton, & R. Serpa (Eds)., Gaining control of the corporate culture (pp. 17-43). San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass. 



Schein, E. H. (1985b). Organizational culture and leadership. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Schein, E. H. (1992). Organizational culture and leadership (2nd ed.). San Francisco: Jossey- 
Bass. 

Schein, E.H. (1999). The corporate culture survival guide: Sense and nonsense about culture 
change. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Shebib, Bob (2003). Bob. Choices: Interviewing and Counselling Skills for Canadians, 2nd 
edition, Pearson Education Canada Inc. 

Thompson, K. R., & Luthans, F. (1990). Organizational culture: A behavioral perspective. In B. 
Schneider (Ed.), Organizational climate and culture (pp. 319-344). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Trompenaars, F. & Hampden-Turner, C. (1998). Riding the Waves of Culture: Understanding 
Cultural Diversity in Global Business. Irwin. 

The Cain Project in Engineering and Professional Communication. Guide to Communication and 
Corporate Culture. Connexions. Retrieved October 28, 2011 from 
http://cnx.org/content/ml7 1 16/latest/ 

Wheatley, M. (2006). Leadership and the New Science: Discovering order in a chaotic world. 
San Francisco, Berrett-Koehler 

Wilkins, A. L., & Patterson, K. J. (1985). You can 't get therefrom here: What will make culture- 
change projects fail. In R. H. Kilman, M. J. Saxton, & R. Serpa (Eds)., Gaining control of the 
corporate culture (pp. 262-291). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 



